
BARCHESTER CLOISTERS.


On the morning of the Sunday after the dean's return Mr. Harding was
lying in his bed, and Posy was sitting on the bed beside him. It was
manifest to all now that he became feebler and feebler from day to
day, and that he would never leave his bed again. Even the archdeacon
had shaken his head, and had acknowledged to his wife that the last
day for her father was near at hand. It would very soon be necessary
that he should select another vicar for St. Ewolds.

"Grandpa won't play cat's-cradle," said Posy, as Mrs. Arabin entered
the room.

"No, darling,--not this morning," said the old man. He himself knew
well enough that he would never play cat's-cradle again. Even that
was over for him now.

"She teases you, papa," said Mrs. Arabin.

"No, indeed," said he. "Posy never teases me;" and he slowly moved
his withered hand down outside the bed, so as to hold the child by
her frock. "Let her stay with me, my dear."

"Dr. Filgrave is downstairs, papa. You will see him, if he comes up?"
Now Dr. Filgrave was the leading physician of Barchester, and nobody
of note in the city,--or for the matter of that in the eastern
division of the county,--was allowed to start upon the last great
journey without some assistance from him as the hour of going drew
nigh. I do not know that he had much reputation for prolonging life,
but he was supposed to add a grace to the hour of departure. Mr.
Harding had expressed no wish to see the doctor,--had rather declared
his conviction that Dr. Filgrave could be of no possible service to
him. But he was not a man to persevere in his objection in opposition
to the wishes of the friends around him; and as soon as the
archdeacon had spoken a word on the subject he assented.

"Of course, my dear, I will see him."

"And Posy shall come back when he has gone," said Mrs. Arabin.

"Posy will do me more good than Dr. Filgrave I am quite sure;--but
Posy shall go now." So Posy scrambled off the bed, and the doctor was
ushered into the room.

"A day or two will see the end of it, Mr. Archdeacon;--I should say a
day or two," said the doctor, as he met Dr. Grantly in the hall. "I
should say that a day or two would see the end of it. Indeed I will
not undertake that twenty-four hours may not see the close of his
earthly troubles. He has no suffering, no pain, no disturbing cause.
Nature simply retires to rest." Dr. Filgrave, as he said this, made a
slow falling motion with his hands, which alone on various occasions
had been thought to be worth all the money paid for his attendance.
"Perhaps you would wish that I should step in in the evening, Mr.
Dean? As it happens, I shall be at liberty." The dean of course said
that he would take it as an additional favour. Neither the dean nor
the archdeacon had the slightest belief in Dr. Filgrave, and yet they
would hardly have been contented that their father-in-law should have
departed without him.

"Look at that man, now," said the archdeacon, when the doctor had
gone, "who talks so glibly about nature going to rest. I've known
him all my life. He's an older man by some months than our dear
old friend upstairs. And he looks as if he were going to attend
death-beds in Barchester for ever."

"I suppose he is right in what he tells us now?" said the dean.

"No doubt he is; but my belief doesn't come from his saying it." Then
there was a pause as the two church dignitaries sat together, doing
nothing, feeling that the solemnity of the moment was such that it
would be hardly becoming that they should even attempt to read. "His
going will make an old man of me," said the archdeacon. "It will be
different with you."

"It will make an old woman of Eleanor, I fear."

"I seem to have known him all my life," said the archdeacon. "I have
known him ever since I left college; and I have known him as one
man seldom knows another. There is nothing that he has done,--as I
believe, nothing that he has thought,--with which I have not been
cognizant. I feel sure that he never had an impure fancy in his mind,
or a faulty wish in his heart. His tenderness has surpassed the
tenderness of woman; and yet, when an occasion came for showing it,
he had all the spirit of a hero. I shall never forget his resignation
of the hospital, and all that I did and said to make him keep it."

"But he was right?"

"As Septimus Harding he was, I think, right; but it would have been
wrong in any other man. And he was right, too, about the deanery."
For promotion had once come in Mr. Harding's way, and he, too, might
have been Dean of Barchester. "The fact is, he never was wrong.
He couldn't go wrong. He lacked guile, and he feared God,--and a
man who does both will never go far astray. I don't think he ever
coveted aught in his life,--except a new case for his violoncello and
somebody to listen to him when he played it." Then the archdeacon got
up, and walked about the room in his enthusiasm; and, perhaps, as
he walked some thoughts as to the sterner ambition of his own life
passed through his mind. What things had he coveted? Had he lacked
guile? He told himself that he had feared God,--but he was not sure
that he was telling himself true even in that.

During the whole of the morning Mrs. Arabin and Mrs. Grantly were
with their father, and during the greater part of the day there was
absolute silence in the room. He seemed to sleep; and they, though
they knew that in truth he was not sleeping, feared to disturb him
by a word. About two Mrs. Baxter brought him his dinner, and he did
rouse himself, and swallowed a spoonful or two of soup and half
a glass of wine. At this time Posy came to him, and stood at the
bedside, looking at him with her great wide eyes. She seemed to be
aware that life had now gone so far with her dear old friend that she
must not be allowed to sit upon his bed again. But he put his hand
out to her, and she held it, standing quite still and silent. When
Mrs. Baxter came to take away the tray, Posy's mother got up, and
whispered a word to the child. Then Posy went away, and her eyes
never beheld the old man again. That was a day which Posy will
never forget,--not though she should live to be much older than her
grandfather was when she thus left him.

"It is so sweet to have you both here," he said, when he had been
lying silent for nearly an hour after the child had gone. Then they
got up, and came and stood close to him. "There is nothing left for
me to wish, my dears;--nothing." Not long after that he expressed a
desire that the two husbands,--his two sons-in-law,--should come to
him; and Mrs. Arabin went to them, and brought them to the room. As
he took their hands he merely repeated the same words again. "There
is nothing left for me to wish, my dears;--nothing." He never spoke
again above his breath; but ever and anon his daughters, who watched
him, could see that he was praying. The two men did not stay with him
long, but returned to the gloom of the library. The gloom had almost
become the darkness of night, and they were still sitting there
without any light, when Mrs. Baxter entered the room. "The dear
gentleman is no more," said Mrs. Baxter; and it seemed to the
archdeacon that the very moment of his father's death had repeated
itself. When Dr. Filgrave called he was told that his services could
be of no further use. "Dear, dear!" said the doctor. "We are all
dust, Mrs. Baxter; are we not?" There were people in Barchester who
pretended to know how often the doctor had repeated this little
formula during the last thirty years.

There was no violence of sorrow in the house that night; but there
were aching hearts, and one heart so sore that it seemed that no cure
for its anguish could ever reach it. "He has always been with me,"
Mrs. Arabin said to her husband, as he strove to console her. "It was
not that I loved him better than Susan, but I have felt so much more
of his loving tenderness. The sweetness of his voice has been in my
ears almost daily since I was born."

They buried him in the cathedral which he had loved so well, and
in which nearly all the work of his life had been done; and all
Barchester was there to see him laid in his grave within the
cloisters. There was no procession of coaches, no hearse, nor was
there any attempt at funereal pomp. From the dean's side door, across
the vaulted passage, and into the transept,--over the little step
upon which he had so nearly fallen when last he made his way out of
the building,--the coffin was carried on men's shoulders. It was
but a short journey from his bedroom to his grave. But the bell had
been tolling sadly all the morning, and the nave and the aisles and
the transepts, close up to the door leading from the transept into
the cloister, were crowded with those who had known the name and
the figure and the voice of Mr. Harding as long as they had known
anything. Up to this day no one would have said specially that Mr.
Harding was a favourite in the town. He had never been forward enough
in anything to become the acknowledged possessor of popularity. But,
now that he was gone, men and women told each other how good he had
been. They remembered the sweetness of his smile, and talked of
loving little words which he had spoken to them,--either years ago
or the other day, for his words had always been loving. The dean and
the archdeacon came first, shoulder to shoulder, and after them came
their wives. I do not know that it was the proper order for mourning,
but it was a touching sight to be seen, and was long remembered in
Barchester. Painful as it was for them, the two women would be there,
and the two sisters would walk together;--nor would they go before
their husbands. Then there were the archdeacon's two sons,--for the
Rev. Charles Grantly had come to Plumstead on the occasion. And in
the vaulted passage which runs between the deanery and the end of
the transept all the chapter, with the choir, the prebendaries, with
the fat old chancellor, the precentor, and the minor canons down
to the little choristers,--they all were there, and followed in at
the transept door, two by two. And in the transept they were joined
by another clergyman whom no one had expected to see that day. The
bishop was there, looking old and worn,--almost as though he were
unconscious of what he was doing. Since his wife's death no one had
seen him out of the palace or of the palace grounds till that day.
But there he was,--and they made way for him into the procession
behind the two ladies,--and the archdeacon, when he saw it, resolved
that there should be peace in his heart, if peace might be possible.

They made their way into the cloisters where the grave had been
dug,--as many as might be allowed to follow. The place indeed was
open to all who chose to come; but they who had only slightly known
the man, refrained from pressing upon those who had a right to stand
around his coffin. But there was one other there whom the faithful
chronicler of Barchester should mention. Before any other one had
reached the spot, the sexton and the verger between them had led in
between them, among the graves beneath the cloisters, a blind man,
very old, with a wondrous stoop, but who must have owned a grand
stature before extreme old age had bent him, and they placed him
sitting on a stone in the corner of the archway. But as soon as the
shuffling of steps reached his ears, he raised himself with the
aid of his stick, and stood during the service leaning against the
pillar. The blind man was so old that he might almost have been
Mr. Harding's father. This was John Bunce, a bedesman from Hiram's
Hospital,--and none perhaps there had known Mr. Harding better than
he had known him. When the earth had been thrown on to the coffin,
and the service was over, and they were about to disperse, Mrs.
Arabin went up to the old man, and taking his hand between hers
whispered a word into his ear. "Oh, Miss Eleanor," he said. "Oh, Miss
Eleanor!" Within a fortnight he also was lying within the cathedral
precincts.

And so they buried Mr. Septimus Harding, formerly Warden of Hiram's
Hospital in the city of Barchester, of whom the chronicler may say
that that city never knew a sweeter gentleman or a better Christian.




