
THE LAST SCENE AT HOGGLESTOCK.


[Illustration]

The fortnight following Mr. Harding's death was passed very quietly
at Hogglestock, for during that time no visitor made an appearance in
the parish except Mr. Snapper on the Sundays. Mr. Snapper, when he
had completed the service on the first of these Sundays, intimated to
Mr. Crawley his opinion that probably that gentleman might himself
wish to resume the duties on the following Sabbath. Mr. Crawley,
however, courteously declined to do anything of the kind. He said
that it was quite out of the question that he should do so without a
direct communication made to him from the bishop, or by the bishop's
order. The assizes had, of course, gone by, and all question of the
trial was over. Nevertheless,--as Mr. Snapper said,--the bishop had
not, as yet, given any order. Mr. Snapper was of opinion that the
bishop in these days was not quite himself. He had spoken to the
bishop about it and the bishop had told him peevishly--"I must say
quite peevishly," Mr. Snapper had said,--that nothing was to be done
at present. Mr. Snapper was not the less clearly of opinion that Mr.
Crawley might resume his duties. To this, however, Mr. Crawley would
not assent.

But even during the fortnight Mr. Crawley had not remained altogether
neglected. Two days after Mr. Harding's death he had received a note
from the dean in which he was advised not to resume the duties at
Hogglestock for the present. "Of course you can understand that we
have a sad house here at present," the dean had said. "But as soon as
ever we are able to move in the matter we will arrange things for you
as comfortably as we can. I will see the bishop myself." Mr. Crawley
had no ambitious idea of any comfort which might accrue to him beyond
that of an honourable return to his humble preferment at Hogglestock;
but, nevertheless, he was in this case minded to do as the dean
counselled him. He had submitted himself to the bishop, and he would
wait till the bishop absolved him from his submission.

On the day after the funeral, the bishop had sent his compliments to
the dean with the expression of a wish that the dean would call upon
him on any early day that might be convenient with reference to the
position of Mr. Crawley of Hogglestock. The note was in the bishop's
own handwriting and was as mild and civil as a bishop's note could
be. Of course the dean named an early day for the interview; but it
was necessary before he went to the bishop that he should discuss
the matter with the archdeacon. If St. Ewolds might be given to Mr.
Crawley, the Hogglestock difficulties would all be brought to an
end. The archdeacon, after the funeral, had returned to Plumstead,
and thither the dean went to him before he saw the bishop. He did
succeed,--he and Mrs. Grantly between them,--but with very great
difficulty, in obtaining a conditional promise. They had both thought
that when the archdeacon became fully aware that Grace was to be his
daughter-in-law, he would at once have been delighted to have an
opportunity of extricating from his poverty a clergyman with whom it
was his fate to be so closely connected. But he fought the matter
on twenty different points. He declared at first that as it was his
primary duty to give to the people of St. Ewolds the best clergyman
he could select for them he could not give the preferment to Mr.
Crawley, because Mr. Crawley, in spite of all his zeal and piety, was
a man so quaint in his manners and so eccentric in his mode of speech
as not to be the best clergyman whom he could select. "What is my
old friend Thorne to do with a man in his parish who won't drink
a glass of wine with him?" For Ullathorne, the seat of that Mr.
Wilfred Thorne who had been so guilty in the matter of the foxes,
was situated in the parish of St. Ewolds. When Mrs. Grantly proposed
that Mr. Thorne's consent should be asked, the archdeacon became very
angry. He had never heard so unecclesiastical a proposition in his
life. It was his special duty to do the best he could for Mr. Thorne,
but it was specially his duty to do so without consulting Mr. Thorne
about it. As the archdeacon's objection had been argued simply on the
point of the glass of wine, both the dean and Mrs. Grantly thought
that he was unreasonable. But they had their point to gain, and
therefore they only flattered him. They were sure that Mr. Thorne
would like to have a clergyman in the parish who would himself be
closely connected with the archdeacon. Then Dr. Grantly alleged that
he might find himself in a trap. What if he conferred the living of
St. Ewolds on Mr. Crawley and after all there should be no marriage
between his son and Grace? "Of course they'll be married," said Mrs.
Grantly. "It's all very well for you to say that, my dear; but the
whole family are so queer that there is no knowing what the girl may
do. She may take up some other fad now, and refuse him point blank."
"She has never taken up any fad," said Mrs. Grantly, who now mounted
almost to wrath in defence of her future daughter-in-law, "and you
are wrong to say that she has. She has behaved beautifully;--as
nobody knows better than you do." Then the archdeacon gave way so far
as to promise that St. Ewolds should be offered to Mr. Crawley as
soon as Grace Crawley was in truth engaged to Harry Grantly.

After that, the dean went to the palace. There had never been any
quarrelling between the bishop and the dean, either direct or
indirect;--nor, indeed, had the dean ever quarrelled even with Mrs.
Proudie. But he had belonged to the anti-Proudie faction. He had
been brought into the diocese by the Grantly interest; and therefore,
during Mrs. Proudie's life-time, he had always been accounted among
the enemies. There had never been any real intimacy between the
houses. Each house had been always asked to dine with the other
house once a year; but it had been understood that such dinings were
ecclesiastico-official, and not friendly. There had been the same
outside diocesan civility between even the palace and Plumstead. But
now, when the great chieftain of the palace was no more, and the
strength of the palace faction was gone, peace, or perhaps something
more than peace,--amity, perhaps, might be more easily arranged
with the dean than with the archdeacon. In preparation for such
arrangements the bishop had gone to Mr. Harding's funeral.

And now the dean went to the palace at the bishop's behest. He
found his lordship alone, and was received with almost reverential
courtesy. He thought that the bishop was looking wonderfully aged
since he last saw him, but did not perhaps take into account the
absence of clerical sleekness which was incidental to the bishop's
private life in his private room, and perhaps in a certain measure
to his recent great affliction. The dean had been in the habit of
regarding Dr. Proudie as a man almost young for his age,--having
been in the habit of seeing him at his best, clothed in authority,
redolent of the throne, conspicuous as regarded his apron and outward
signs of episcopality. Much of all this was now absent. The bishop,
as he rose to greet the dean, shuffled with his old slippers, and his
hair was not brushed so becomingly as used to be the case when Mrs.
Proudie was always near him.

It was necessary that a word should be said by each as to the loss
which the other had suffered. "Mr. Dean," said his lordship, "allow
me to offer you my condolements in regard to the death of that very
excellent clergyman and most worthy gentleman, your father-in-law."

"Thank you, my lord. He was excellent and worthy. I do not suppose
that I shall live to see any man who was more so. You also have a
great,--a terrible loss."

"O, Mr. Dean, yes; yes, indeed, Mr. Dean. That was a loss."

"And hardly past the prime of life!"

"Ah, yes;--just fifty-six,--and so strong! Was she not? At least
everybody thought so. And yet she was gone in a minute;--gone in a
minute. I haven't held up my head since, Mr. Dean."

"It was a great loss, my lord; but you must struggle to bear it."

"I do struggle. I am struggling. But it makes one feel so lonely in
this great house. Ah, me! I often wish, Mr. Dean, that it had pleased
Providence to have left me in some humble parsonage, where duty would
have been easier than it is here. But I will not trouble you with all
that. What are we to do, Mr. Dean, about this poor Mr. Crawley?"

"Mr. Crawley is a very old friend of mine, and a very dear friend."

"Is he? Ah! A very worthy man, I am sure, and one who has been much
tried by undeserved adversities."

"Most severely tried, my lord."

"Sitting among the potsherds, like Job; has he not, Mr. Dean? Well;
let us hope that all that is over. When this accusation about the
robbery was brought against him, I found myself bound to interfere."

"He has no complaint to make on that score."

"I hope not. I have not wished to be harsh, but what could I do, Mr.
Dean? They told me that the civil authorities found the evidence so
strong against him that it could not be withstood."

"It was very strong."

"And we thought that he should at least be relieved, and we sent for
Dr. Tempest, who is his rural dean." Then the bishop, remembering all
the circumstances of that interview with Dr. Tempest,--as to which he
had ever felt assured that one of the results of it was the death of
his wife, whereby there was no longer any "we" left in the palace of
Barchester,--sighed piteously, looking up at the dean with hopeless
face.

"Nobody doubts, my lord, that you acted for the best."

"I hope we did. I think we did. And now what shall we do? He has
resigned his living, both to you and to me, as I hear,--you being
the patron. It will simply be necessary, I think, that he should ask
to have the letters cancelled. Then, as I take it, there need be no
reinstitution. You cannot think, Mr. Dean, how much I have thought
about it all."

Then the dean unfolded his budget, and explained to the bishop
how he hoped that the living of St. Ewolds, which was, after some
ecclesiastical fashion, attached to the rectory of Plumstead, and
which was now vacant by the demise of Mr. Harding, might be conferred
by the archdeacon upon Mr. Crawley. It was necessary to explain also
that this could not be done quite immediately, and in doing this the
dean encountered some little difficulty. The archdeacon, he said,
wished to be allowed another week to think about it; and therefore
perhaps provision for the duties at Hogglestock might yet be made for
a few Sundays. The bishop, the dean said, might easily understand
that, after what had occurred, Mr. Crawley would hardly wish to go
again into that pulpit, unless he did so as resuming duties which
would necessarily be permanent with him. To all this the bishop
assented, but he was apparently struck with much wonder at the choice
made by the archdeacon. "I should have thought, Mr. Dean," he said,
"that Mr. Crawley was the last man to have suited the archdeacon's
choice."

"The archdeacon and I married sisters, my lord."

"Oh, ah! yes. And he puts the nomination of St. Ewolds at your
disposition. I am sure I shall be delighted to institute so worthy
a gentleman as Mr. Crawley." Then the dean took his leave of the
bishop,--as will we also. Poor dear bishop! I am inclined to think
that he was right in his regrets as to the little parsonage. Not that
his failure at Barchester, and his present consciousness of lonely
incompetence, were mainly due to any positive inefficiency on his
own part. He might have been a sufficiently good bishop, had it not
been that Mrs. Proudie was so much more than a sufficiently good
bishop's wife. We will now say farewell to him, with a hope that the
lopped tree may yet become green again, and to some extent fruitful,
although all its beautiful head and richness of waving foliage have
been taken from it.

About a week after this Henry Grantly rode over from Cosby Lodge to
Hogglestock. It has been just said that though the assizes had passed
by and though all question of Mr. Crawley's guilt was now set aside,
no visitor had of late made his way over to Hogglestock. I fancy
that Grace Crawley forgot, in the fulness of her memory as to other
things, that Mr. Harding, of whose death she heard, had been her
lover's grandfather,--and that therefore there might possibly be some
delay. Had there been much said between the mother and the daughter
about the lover, no doubt all this would have been explained;
but Grace was very reticent, and there were other matters in the
Hogglestock household which in those days occupied Mrs. Crawley's
mind. How were they again to begin life? for, in very truth, life
as it had existed with them before, had been brought to an end. But
Grace remembered well the sort of compact which existed between
her and her lover;--the compact which had been made in very words
between herself and her lover's father. Complete in her estimation
as had been the heaven opened to her by Henry Grantly's offer, she
had refused it all,--lest she should bring disgrace upon him. But the
disgrace was not certain; and if her father should be made free from
it, then,--then,--then Henry Grantly ought to come to her and be
at her feet with all the expedition possible to him. That was her
reading of the compact. She had once declared, when speaking of the
possible disgrace which might attach itself to her family and to her
name, that her poverty did not "signify a bit." She was not ashamed
of her father,--only of the accusation against her father. Therefore
she had hurried home when that accusation was withdrawn, desirous
that her lover should tell her of his love,--if he chose to repeat
such telling,--amidst all the poor things of Hogglestock, and not
among the chairs and tables and good dinners of luxurious Framley.
Mrs. Robarts had given a true interpretation to Lady Lufton of the
haste which Grace had displayed. But she need not have been in so
great a hurry. She had been at home already above a fortnight, and
as yet he had made no sign. At last she said a word to her mother.
"Might I not ask to go back to Miss Prettyman's now, mamma?" "I
think, dear, you had better wait till things are a little settled.
Papa is to hear again from the dean very soon. You see they are all
in a great sorrow at Barchester about poor Mr. Harding's death."
"Grace!" said Jane, rushing into the house almost speechless, at that
moment, "here he is!--on horseback." I do not know why Jane should
have talked about Major Grantly as simply "he." There had been no
conversation among the sisters to justify her in such a mode of
speech. Grace had not a moment to put two and two together, so that
she might realize the meaning of what her mother had said; but
nevertheless, she felt at the moment that the man, coming as he had
done now, had come with all commendable speed. How foolish had she
been with her wretched impatience!

There he was certainly, tying his horse up to the railing. "Mamma,
what am I to say to him?"

"Nay, dear; he is your own friend,--of your own making. You must say
what you think fit."

"You are not going?"

"I think we had better, dear." Then she went, and Jane with her, and
Jane opened the door for Major Grantly. Mr. Crawley himself was away,
at Hoggle End, and did not return till after Major Grantly had left
the parsonage. Jane, as she greeted the grand gentleman, whom she
had seen and no more than seen, hardly knew what to say to him.
When, after a minute's hesitation, she told him that Grace was in
there,--pointing to the sitting-room door, she felt that she had been
very awkward. Henry Grantly, however, did not, I think, feel her
awkwardness, being conscious of some small difficulties of his own.
When, however, he found that Grace was alone, the task before him at
once lost half its difficulties. "Grace," he said, "am I right to
come to you now?"

"I do not know," she said. "I cannot tell."

"Dearest Grace, there is no reason on earth now why you should not be
my wife."

"Is there not?"

"I know of none,--if you can love me. You saw my father?"

"Yes, I saw him."

"And you heard what he said?"

"I hardly remember what he said;--but he kissed me, and I thought he
was very kind."

What little attempt Henry Grantly then made, thinking that he could
not do better than follow closely the example of so excellent a
father, need not be explained with minuteness. But I think that his
first effort was not successful. Grace was embarrassed and retreated,
and it was not till she had been compelled to give a direct answer
to a direct question that she submitted to allow his arm round her
waist. But when she had answered that question she was almost more
humble than becomes a maiden who has just been wooed and won. A
maiden who has been wooed and won, generally thinks that it is she
who has conquered, and chooses to be triumphant accordingly. But
Grace was even mean enough to thank her lover. "I do not know why you
should be so good to me," she said.

"Because I love you," said he, "better than all the world."

"But why should you be so good to me as that? Why should you love me?
I am such a poor thing for a man like you to love."

"I have had the wit to see that you are not a poor thing, Grace;
and it is thus that I have earned my treasure. Some girls are poor
things, and some are rich treasures."

"If love can make me a treasure, I will be your treasure. And if love
can make me rich, I will be rich for you." After that I think he had
no difficulty in following in his father's footsteps.

After a while Mrs. Crawley came in, and there was much pleasant
talking among them, while Henry Grantly sat happily with his love,
as though waiting for Mr. Crawley's return. But though he was there
nearly all the morning Mr. Crawley did not return. "I think he
likes the brickmakers better than anybody in all the world, except
ourselves," said Grace. "I don't know how he will manage to get on
without his friends." Before Grace had said this, Major Grantly
had told all his story, and had produced a letter from his father,
addressed to Mr. Crawley, of which the reader shall have a copy,
although at this time the letter had not been opened. The letter was
as follows:--


   Plumstead Rectory, -- May, 186--.

   MY DEAR SIR,

   You will no doubt have heard that Mr. Harding, the vicar
   of St. Ewolds, who was the father of my wife and of Mrs.
   Arabin, has been taken from us. The loss to us of so
   excellent and so dear a man has been very great. I have
   conferred with my friend the Dean of Barchester as to a
   new nomination, and I venture to request your acceptance
   of the preferment, if it should suit you to move from
   Hogglestock to St. Ewolds. It may be as well that I should
   state plainly my reasons for making this offer to a
   gentleman with whom I am not personally acquainted. Mr.
   Harding, on his deathbed, himself suggested it, moved
   thereto by what he had heard of the cruel and undeserved
   persecution to which you have lately been subjected;
   as also,--on which point he was very urgent in what he
   said,--by the character which you bear in the diocese for
   zeal and piety. I may also add, that the close connection
   which, as I understand, is likely to take place between
   your family and mine has been an additional reason for
   my taking this step, and the long friendship which has
   existed between you and my wife's brother-in-law, the Dean
   of Barchester, is a third.

   St. Ewolds is worth £350 per annum, besides the house,
   which is sufficiently commodious for a moderate family.
   The population is about twelve hundred, of which more than
   a half consists of persons dwelling in an outskirt of the
   city,--for the parish runs almost into Barchester.

   I shall be glad to have your reply with as little delay
   as may suit your convenience, and in the event of your
   accepting the offer,--which I sincerely trust you may be
   enabled to do,--I shall hope to have an early opportunity
   of seeing you, with reference to your institution to the
   parish.

   Allow me also to say to you and to Mrs. Crawley that, if
   we have been correctly informed as to that other event
   to which I have alluded, we both hope that we may have
   an early opportunity of making ourselves personally
   acquainted with the parents of a young lady who is to
   be so dear to us. As I have met your daughter, I may
   perhaps be allowed to send her my kindest love. If, as my
   daughter-in-law, she comes up to the impression which she
   gave me at our first meeting, I, at any rate, shall be
   satisfied.

   I have the honour to be, my dear sir,
   Your most faithful servant,

   THEOPHILUS GRANTLY.


This letter the archdeacon had shown to his wife, by whom it had not
been very warmly approved. Nothing, Mrs. Grantly had said, could be
prettier than what the archdeacon had said about Grace. Mrs. Crawley,
no doubt, would be satisfied with that. But Mr. Crawley was such a
strange man! "He will be stranger than I take him to be if he does
not accept St. Ewolds," said the archdeacon. "But in offering it,"
said Mrs. Grantly, "you have not said a word of your own high opinion
of his merits." "I have not a very high opinion of them," said the
archdeacon. "Your father had, and I have said so. And as I have the
most profound respect for your father's opinion in such a matter, I
have permitted that to overcome my own hesitation." This was pretty
from the husband to the wife as it regarded her father, who had now
gone from them; and, therefore, Mrs. Grantly accepted it without
further argument. The reader may probably feel assured that the
archdeacon had never, during their joint lives, acted in any church
matter upon the advice given to him by Mr. Harding; and it was
probably the case also that the living would have been offered to
Mr. Crawley, if nothing had been said by Mr. Harding on the subject;
but it did not become Mrs. Grantly even to think of all this. The
archdeacon, having made his gracious speech about her father, was not
again asked to alter his letter. "I suppose he will accept it," said
Mrs. Grantly. "I should think that he probably may," said the
archdeacon.

So Grace, knowing what was the purport of the letter, sat with it
between her fingers, while her lover sat beside her, full of various
plans for the future. This was his first lover's present to her;--and
what a present it was! Comfort, and happiness, and a pleasant home
for all her family. "St. Ewolds isn't the best house in the world,"
said the major, "because it is old, and what I call piecemeal; but
it is very pretty, and certainly nice." "That is just the sort of
parsonage that I dream about," said Jane. "And the garden is pleasant
with old trees," said the major. "I always dream about old trees,"
said Jane, "only I'm afraid I'm too old myself to be let to climb up
them now." Mrs. Crawley said very little, but sat by with her eyes
full of tears. Was it possible that, at last, before the world had
closed upon her, she was to enjoy something again of the comforts
which she had known in her early years, and to be again surrounded by
those decencies of life which of late had been almost banished from
her home by poverty!

Their various plans for the future,--for the immediate future,--were
very startling. Grace was to go over at once to Plumstead, whither
Edith had been already transferred from Cosby Lodge. That was all
very well; there was nothing very startling or impracticable in
that. The Framley ladies, having none of those doubts as to what
was coming which had for a while perplexed Grace herself, had taken
little liberties with her wardrobe, which enabled such a visit to be
made without overwhelming difficulties. But the major was equally
eager,--or at any rate equally imperious,--in his requisition for
a visit from Mr. and Mrs. Crawley themselves to Plumstead rectory.
Mrs. Crawley did not dare to put forward the plain unadorned reasons
against it, as Mr. Crawley had done when discussing the subject of
a visit to the deanery. Nor could she quite venture to explain that
she feared that the archdeacon and her husband would hardly mix well
together in society. With whom, indeed, was it possible that her
husband should mix well, after his long and hardly-tried seclusion?
She could only plead that both her husband and herself were so little
used to going out that she feared,--she feared,--she feared she
knew not what. "We'll get over all that," said the major, almost
contemptuously. "It is only the first plunge that is disagreeable."
Perhaps the major did not know how very disagreeable a first plunge
may be!

At two o'clock Henry Grantly got up to go. "I should very much like
to have seen him, but I fear I cannot wait longer. As it is, the
patience of my horse has been surprising." Then Grace walked out with
him to the gate, and put her hand upon his bridle as he mounted, and
thought how wonderful was the power of Fortune, that the goddess
should have sent so gallant a gentleman to be her lord and her lover.
"I declare I don't quite believe it even yet," she said, in the
letter which she wrote to Lily Dale that night.

It was four before Mr. Crawley returned to his house, and then he was
very weary. There were many sick in these days at Hoggle End, and he
had gone from cottage to cottage through the day. Giles Hoggett was
almost unable to work from rheumatism, but still was of opinion that
doggedness might carry him on. "It's been a deal o' service to you,
Muster Crawley," he said. "We hears about it all. If you hadn't a
been dogged, where'd you a been now?" With Giles Hoggett and others
he had remained all the day, and now he came home weary and beaten.
"You'll tell him first," Grace had said, "and then I'll give him the
letter." The wife was the first to tell him of the good fortune that
was coming.

He flung himself into the old chair as soon as he entered, and asked
for some bread and tea. "Jane has already gone for it, dear," said
his wife. "We have had a visitor here, Josiah."

"A visitor,--what visitor?"

"Grace's own friend,--Henry Grantly."

"Grace, come here, that I may kiss you and bless you," he said, very
solemnly. "It would seem that the world is going to be very good to
you."

"Papa, you must read this letter first."

"Before I kiss my own darling?" Then she knelt at his feet. "I
see," he said, taking the letter; "it is from your lover's father.
Peradventure he signifies his consent, which would be surely needful
before such a marriage would be seemly."

[Illustration: "Peradventure he signifies his Consent."]

"It isn't about me, papa, at all."

"Not about you? If so, that would be most unpromising. But, in any
case, you are my best darling." Then he kissed her and blessed her,
and slowly opened the letter. His wife had now come close to him, and
was standing over him, touching him, so that she also could read the
archdeacon's letter. Grace, who was still in front of him, could see
the working of his face as he read it; but even she could not tell
whether he was gratified, or offended, or dismayed. When he had got
as far as the first offer of the presentation, he ceased reading for
a while, and looked round about the room as though lost in thought.
"Let me see what further he writes to me," he then said; and after
that he continued the letter slowly to the end. "Nay, my child, you
were in error in saying that he wrote not about you. 'Tis in writing
of you he has put some real heart into his words. He writes as though
his home would be welcome to you."

"And does he not make St. Ewolds welcome to you, papa?"

"He makes me welcome to accept it,--if I may use the word after the
ordinary and somewhat faulty parlance of mankind."

"And you will accept it,--of course?"

"I know not that, my dear. The acceptance of a cure of souls is
a thing not to be decided on in a moment,--as is the colour of a
garment or the shape of a toy. Nor would I condescend to take this
thing from the archdeacon's hands, if I thought that he bestowed it
simply that the father of his daughter-in-law might no longer be
accounted poor."

"Does he say that, papa?"

"He gives it as a collateral reason, basing his offer first on the
kindly expressed judgment of one who is now no more. Then he refers
to the friendship of the dean. If he believed that the judgment of
his late father-in-law in so weighty a matter were the best to be
relied upon of all that were at his command, then he would have
done well to trust to it. But in such case he should have bolstered
up a good ground for action with no collateral supports which
are weak,--and worse than weak. However, it shall have my best
consideration, whereunto I hope that wisdom will be given me where
only such wisdom can be had."

"Josiah," said his wife to him, when they were alone, "you will not
refuse it?"

"Not willingly,--not if it may be accepted. Alas! you need not urge
me, when the temptation is so strong!"




