
MR. TOOGOOD.


[Illustration]

Mr. Crawley had declared to Mr. Robarts, that he would summon no
legal aid to his assistance at the coming trial. The reader may,
perhaps, remember the impetuosity with which he rejected the advice
on this subject which was conveyed to him by Mr. Robarts with all the
authority of Archdeacon Grantly's name. "Tell the archdeacon," he had
said, "that I will have none of his advice." And then Mr. Robarts had
left him, fully convinced that any further interference on his part
could be of no avail. Nevertheless, the words which had then been
spoken were not without effect. This coming trial was ever present to
Mr. Crawley's mind, and though, when driven to discuss the subject,
he would speak of it with high spirit, as he had done both to the
bishop and to Mr. Robarts, yet in his long hours of privacy, or when
alone with his wife, his spirit was anything but high. "It will kill
me," he would say to her. "I shall get salvation thus. Death will
relieve me, and I shall never be called upon to stand before those
cruel eager eyes." Then would she try to say words of comfort,
sometimes soothing him as though he were a child, and at others
bidding him be a man, and remember that as a man he should have
sufficient endurance to bear the eyes of any crowd that might be
there to look at him.

"I think I will go up to London," he said to her one evening, very
soon after the day of Mr. Robarts's visit.

"Go up to London, Josiah!" Mr. Crawley had not been up to London
once since they had been settled at Hogglestock, and this sudden
resolution on his part frightened his wife. "Go up to London,
dearest! and why?"

"I will tell you why. They all say that I should speak to some man of
the law whom I may trust about this coming trial. I trust no one in
these parts. Not, mark you, that I say that they are untrustworthy.
God forbid that I should so speak or even so think of men whom I
know not. But the matter has become so common in men's mouths at
Barchester and at Silverbridge, that I cannot endure to go among
them and to talk of it. I will go up to London, and I will see your
cousin, Mr. John Toogood, of Gray's Inn." Now in this scheme there
was an amount of everyday prudence which startled Mrs. Crawley almost
as much as did the prospect of the difficulties to be overcome if the
journey were to be made. Her husband, in the first place, had never
once seen Mr. John Toogood; and in days very long back, when he and
she were making their first gallant struggle,--for in those days it
had been gallant,--down in their Cornish curacy, he had reprobated
certain Toogood civilities,--professional civilities,--which had been
proffered, perhaps, with too plain an intimation that on the score
of relationship the professional work should be done without payment.
The Mr. Toogood of those days, who had been Mrs. Crawley's uncle,
and the father of Mrs. Eames and grandfather of our friend Johnny
Eames, had been much angered by some correspondence which had grown
up between him and Mr. Crawley, and from that day there had been a
cessation of all intercourse between the families. Since those days
that Toogood had been gathered to the ancient Toogoods of old, and
the son reigned on the family throne in Raymond's Buildings. The
present Toogood was therefore first-cousin to Mrs. Crawley. But
there had been no intimacy between them. Mrs. Crawley had not seen
her cousin since her marriage,--as indeed she had seen none of her
relations, having been estranged from them by the singular bearing of
her husband. She knew that her cousin stood high in his profession,
the firm of Toogood and Crump,--Crump and Toogood it should have been
properly called in these days,--having always held its head up high
above all dirty work; and she felt that her husband could look for
advice from no better source. But how would such a one as he manage
to tell his story to a stranger? Nay, how would he find his way alone
into the lawyer's room, to tell his story at all,--so strange was he
to the world? And then the expense! "If you do not wish me to apply
to your cousin, say so, and there shall be an end of it," said Mr.
Crawley in an angry tone.

"Of course I would wish it. I believe him to be an excellent man, and
a good lawyer."

"Then why should I not go to his chambers? In formâ pauperis I must
go to him, and must tell him so. I cannot pay him for the labour of
his counsel, nor for such minutes of his time as I shall use."

"Oh, Josiah, you need not speak of that."

"But I must speak of it. Can I go to a professional man, who keeps
as it were his shop open for those who may think fit to come, and
purchase of him, and take of his goods, and afterwards, when the
goods have been used, tell him that I have not the price in my hand?
I will not do that, Mary. You think that I am mad, that I know not
what I do. Yes,--I see it in your eyes; and you are sometimes partly
right. But I am not so mad but that I know what is honest. I will
tell your cousin that I am sore straitened, and brought down into
the very dust by misfortune. And I will beseech him, for what of
ancient feeling of family he may bear to you, to listen to me for a
while. And I will be very short, and, if need be, will bide his time
patiently, and perhaps he may say a word to me that may be of use."

There was certainly very much in this to provoke Mrs. Crawley. It
was not only that she knew well that her cousin would give ample
and immediate attention, and lend himself thoroughly to the matter
without any idea of payment,--but that she could not quite believe
that her husband's humility was true humility. She strove to believe
it, but knew that she failed. After all it was only a feeling on her
part. There was no argument within herself about it. An unpleasant
taste came across the palate of her mind, as such a savour will
sometimes, from some unexpected source, come across the palate of the
mouth. Well; she could only gulp at it, and swallow it and excuse it.
Among the salad that comes from your garden a bitter leaf will now
and then make its way into your salad-bowl. Alas, there were so many
bitter leaves ever making their way into her bowl! "What I mean is,
Josiah, that no long explanation will be needed. I think, from what I
remember of him, that he would do for us anything that he could do."

"Then I will go to the man, and will humble myself before him. Even
that, hard as it is to me, may be a duty that I owe." Mr. Crawley as
he said this was remembering the fact that he was a clergyman of the
Church of England, and that he had a rank of his own in the country,
which, did he ever do such a thing as go out to dinner in company,
would establish for him a certain right of precedence; whereas this
attorney, of whom he was speaking, was, so to say, nobody in the eyes
of the world.

"There need be no humbling, Josiah, other than that which is due from
man to man in all circumstances. But never mind; we will not talk
about that. If it seems good to you, go to Mr. Toogood. I think that
it is good. May I write to him and say that you will go?"

"I will write myself; it will be more seemly."

Then the wife paused before she asked the next question,--paused for
some minute or two, and then asked it with anxious doubt,--"And may
I go with you, Josiah?"

"Why should two go when one can do the work?" he answered sharply.
"Have we money so much at command?"

"Indeed, no."

"You should go and do it all, for you are wiser in these things than
I am, were it not that I may not dare to show--that I submit myself
to my wife."

"Nay, my dear!"

"But it is ay, my dear. It is so. This is a thing such as men do; not
such as women do, unless they be forlorn and unaided of men. I know
that I am weak where you are strong; that I am crazed where you are
clear-witted."

"I meant not that, Josiah. It was of your health that I thought."

"Nevertheless it is as I say; but, for all that, it may not be that
you should do my work. There are those watching me who would say,
'Lo! he confesses himself incapable.' And then some one would whisper
something of a madhouse. Mary, I fear that worse than a prison."

"May God in His mercy forbid such cruelty!"

"But I must look to it, my dear. Do you think that that woman, who
sits there at Barchester in high places, disgracing herself and that
puny ecclesiastical lord who is her husband,--do you think that she
would not immure me if she could? She is a she-wolf,--only less
reasonable than the dumb brute as she sharpens her teeth in malice
coming from anger, and not in malice coming from hunger as do the
outer wolves of the forest. I tell you, Mary, that if she had a
colourable ground for her action, she would swear to-morrow that I am
mad."

"You shall go alone to London."

"Yes, I will go alone. They shall not say that I cannot yet do my own
work as a man should do it. I stood up before him, the puny man who
is called a bishop, and before her who makes herself great by his
littleness, and I scorned them both to their faces. Though the shoes
which I had on were all broken, as I myself could not but see when I
stood, yet I was greater than they were with all their purple and
fine linen."

"But, Josiah, my cousin will not be harsh to you."

"Well,--and if he be not?"

"Ill-usage you can bear; and violent ill-usage, such as that which
Mrs. Proudie allowed herself to exhibit, you can repay with interest;
but kindness seems to be too heavy a burden for you."

"I will struggle. I will endeavour. I will speak but little, and, if
possible, I will listen much. Now, my dear, I will write to this man,
and you shall give me the address that is proper for him." Then he
wrote the letter, not accepting a word in the way of dictation from
his wife, but "craving the great kindness of a short interview, for
which he ventured to become a solicitor, urged thereto by his wife's
assurance that one with whom he was connected by family ties would do
as much as this for the possible preservation of the honour of the
family." In answer to this, Mr. Toogood wrote back as follows:--"Dear
Mr. Crawley, I will be at my office all Thursday morning next from
ten to two, and will take care that you shan't be kept waiting for
me above ten minutes. You parsons never like waiting. But hadn't you
better come and breakfast with me and Maria at nine? then we'd have a
talk as we walk to the office. Yours always, THOMAS TOOGOOD." And
the letter was dated from the attorney's private house in Tavistock
Square.

"I am sure he means to be kind," said Mrs. Crawley.

"Doubtless he means to be kind. But his kindness is rough;--I will
not say unmannerly, as the word would be harsh. I have never even
seen the lady whom he calls Maria."

"She is his wife!"

"So I would venture to suppose; but she is unknown to me. I will
write again, and thank him, and say that I will be with him at ten to
the moment."

There were still many things to be settled before the journey could
be made. Mr. Crawley, in his first plan, proposed that he should
go up by night mail train, travelling in the third class, having
walked over to Silverbridge to meet it; that he should then walk
about London from 5 A.M. to 10 A.M., and afterwards come down by an
afternoon train to which a third class was also attached. But at last
his wife persuaded him that such a task as that, performed in the
middle of the winter, would be enough to kill any man, and that,
if attempted, it would certainly kill him; and he consented at
last to sleep the night in town,--being specially moved thereto by
discovering that he could, in conformity with this scheme, get in
and out of the train at a station considerably nearer to him than
Silverbridge, and that he could get a return-ticket at a third-class
fare. The whole journey, he found, could be done for a pound,
allowing him seven shillings for his night's expenses in London;
and out of the resources of the family there were produced two
sovereigns, so that in the event of accident he would not utterly be
a castaway from want of funds.

So he started on his journey after an early dinner, almost hopeful
through the new excitement of a journey to London, and his wife
walked with him nearly as far as the station. "Do not reject my
cousin's kindness," were the last words she spoke.

"For his professional kindness, if he will extend it to me, I will
be most thankful," he replied. She did not dare to say more; nor had
she dared to write privately to her cousin, asking for any special
help, lest by doing so she should seem to impugn the sufficiency and
stability of her husband's judgment. He got up to town late at night,
and having made inquiry of one of the porters, he hired a bed for
himself in the neighbourhood of the railway station. Here he had
a cup of tea and a morsel of bread-and-butter, and in the morning
he breakfasted again on the same fare. "No, I have no luggage,"
he had said to the girl at the public-house, who had asked him as
to his travelling gear. "If luggage be needed as a certificate of
respectability, I will pass on elsewhere," said he. The girl stared,
and assured him that she did not doubt his respectability. "I
am a clergyman of the Church of England," he had said, "but my
circumstances prevent me from seeking a more expensive lodging."
They did their best to make him comfortable, and, I think, almost
disappointed him in not heaping further misfortunes on his head.

He was in Raymond's Buildings at half-past nine, and for half an
hour walked up and down the umbrageous pavement,--it used to be
umbrageous, but perhaps the trees have gone now,--before the doors
of the various chambers. He could hear the clock strike from Gray's
Inn; and the moment that it had struck he was turning in, but was
encountered in the passage by Mr. Toogood, who was equally punctual
with himself. Strange stories about Mr. Crawley had reached Mr.
Toogood's household, and that Maria, the mention of whose Christian
name had been so offensive to the clergyman, had begged her husband
not to be a moment late. Poor Mr. Toogood, who on ordinary days
did perhaps take a few minutes' grace, was thus hurried away almost
with his breakfast in his throat, and, as we have seen, just
saved himself. "Perhaps, sir, you are Mr. Crawley?" he said, in a
good-humoured, cheery voice. He was a good-humoured, cheery-looking
man, about fifty years of age, with grizzled hair and sunburnt face,
and large whiskers. Nobody would have taken him to be a partner in
any of those great houses of which we have read in history,--the
Quirk, Gammon and Snaps of the profession, or the Dodson and Foggs,
who are immortal.

"That is my name, sir," said Mr. Crawley, taking off his hat and
bowing low, "and I am here by appointment to meet Mr. Toogood, the
solicitor, whose name I see affixed upon the door-post."

"I am Mr. Toogood, the solicitor, and I hope I see you quite well,
Mr. Crawley." Then the attorney shook hands with the clergyman and
preceded him upstairs to the front room on the first floor. "Here we
are, Mr. Crawley, and pray take a chair. I wish you could have made
it convenient to come and see us at home. We are rather long, as my
wife says,--long in family, she means, and therefore are not very
well off for spare beds--"

"Oh, sir."

"I've twelve of 'em living, Mr. Crawley,--from eighteen years, the
eldest,--a girl, down to eighteen months the youngest,--a boy, and
they go in and out, boy and girl, boy and girl, like the cogs of a
wheel. They ain't such far away distant cousins from your own young
ones--only first, once, as we call it."

"I am aware that there is a family tie, or I should not have ventured
to trouble you."

"Blood is thicker than water; isn't it? I often say that. I heard
of one of your girls only yesterday. She is staying somewhere down
in the country, not far from where my sister lives--Mrs. Eames, the
widow of poor John Eames, who never did any good in this world. I
daresay you've heard of her?"

"The name is familiar to me, Mr. Toogood."

"Of course it is. I've a nephew down there just now, and he saw
your girl the other day;--very highly he spoke of her too. Let me
see;--how many is it you have?"

"Three living, Mr. Toogood."

"I've just four times three;--that's the difference. But I comfort
myself with the text about the quiver you know; and I tell them that
when they've eat up all the butter, they'll have to take their bread
dry."

"I trust the young people take your teaching in a proper spirit."

"I don't know much about spirit. There's spirit enough. My second
girl, Lucy, told me that if I came home to-day without tickets for
the pantomime I shouldn't have any dinner allowed me. That's the way
they treat me. But we understand each other at home. We're all pretty
good friends there, thank God. And there isn't a sick chick among the
boiling."

"You have many mercies for which you should indeed be thankful," said
Mr. Crawley, gravely.

"Yes, yes, yes; that's true. I think of that sometimes, though
perhaps not so much as I ought to do. But the best way to be thankful
is to use the goods the gods provide you. 'The lovely Thais sits
beside you. Take the goods the gods provide you.' I often say that
to my wife, till the children have got to calling her Thais. The
children have it pretty much their own way with us, Mr. Crawley."

By this time Mr. Crawley was almost beside himself, and was
altogether at a loss how to bring in the matter on which he wished
to speak. He had expected to find a man who in the hurry of London
business might perhaps just manage to spare him five minutes,--who
would grapple instantly with the subject that was to be discussed
between them, would speak to him half-a-dozen hard words of wisdom,
and would then dismiss him and turn on the instant to other matters
of important business;--but here was an easy familiar fellow, who
seemed to have nothing on earth to do, and who at this first meeting
had taken advantage of a distant family connexion to tell him
everything about the affairs of his own household. And then how
peculiar were the domestic traits which he told! What was Mr. Crawley
to say to a man who had taught his own children to call their mother
Thais? Of Thais Mr. Crawley did know something, and he forgot to
remember that perhaps Mr. Toogood knew less. He felt it, however, to
be very difficult to submit the details of his case to a gentleman
who talked in such a strain about his own wife and children.

But something must be done. Mr. Crawley, in his present frame of
mind, could not sit and talk about Thais all day. "Sir," he said,
"the picture of your home is very pleasant, and I presume that plenty
abounds there."

"Well, you know, pretty toll-loll for that. With twelve of 'em, Mr.
Crawley, I needn't tell you they are not all going to have castles
and parks of their own, unless they can get 'em off their own bats.
But I pay upwards of a hundred a year each for my eldest three boys'
schooling, and I've been paying eighty for the girls. Put that and
that together and see what it comes to. Educate, educate, educate;
that's my word."

"No better word can be spoken, sir."

"I don't think there's a girl in Tavistock Square that can beat
Polly,--she's the eldest, called after her mother, you know;--that
can beat her at the piano. And Lucy has read Lord Byron and Tom Moore
all through, every word of 'em. By Jove, I believe she knows most of
Tom Moore by heart. And the young uns are coming on just as well."

"Perhaps, sir, as your time is, no doubt, precious--"

"Just at this time of the day we don't care so much about it, Mr.
Crawley; and one doesn't catch a new cousin every day, you know."

"However, if you will allow me,--"

"We'll tackle to? Very well; so be it. Now, Mr. Crawley, let me hear
what it is that I can do for you." Of a sudden, as Mr. Toogood spoke
these last words, the whole tone of his voice seemed to change, and
even the position of his body became so much altered as to indicate a
different kind of man. "You just tell your story in your own way, and
I won't interrupt you till you've done. That's always the best."

"I must first crave your attention to an unfortunate preliminary,"
said Mr. Crawley.

"And what is that?"

"I come before you in formâ pauperis." Here Mr. Crawley paused and
stood up before the attorney with his hands crossed one upon the
other, bending low, as though calling attention to the poorness of
his raiment. "I know that I have no justification for my conduct. I
have nothing of reason to offer why I should trespass upon your time.
I am a poor man, and cannot pay you for your services."

"Oh, bother!" said Mr. Toogood, jumping up out of his chair.

"I do not know whether your charity will grant me that which I ask--"

"Don't let's have any more of this," said the attorney. "We none of
us like this kind of thing at all. If I can be of any service to you,
you're as welcome to it as flowers in May; and as for billing my
first-cousin, which your wife is, I should as soon think of sending
in an account to my own."

"But, Mr. Toogood,--"

"Do you go on now with your story; I'll put the rest all right."

"I was bound to be explicit, Mr. Toogood."

"Very well; now you have been explicit with a vengeance, and you may
heave a-head. Let's hear the story, and if I can help you I will.
When I've said that, you may be sure I mean it. I've heard something
of it before; but let me hear it all from you."

Then Mr. Crawley began and told the story. Mr. Toogood was actually
true to his promise and let the narrator go on with his narrative
without interruption. When Mr. Crawley came to his own statement that
the cheque had been paid to him by Mr. Soames, and went on to say
that that statement had been false,--"I told him that, but I told
him so wrongly," and then paused, thinking that the lawyer would ask
some question, Mr. Toogood simply said, "Go on; go on. I'll come back
to all that when you've done." And he merely nodded his head when
Mr. Crawley spoke of his second statement, that the money had come
from the dean. "We had been bound together by close ties of early
familiarity," said Mr. Crawley, "and in former years our estates in
life were the same. But he has prospered and I have failed. And when
creditors were importunate, I consented to accept relief in money
which had previously been often offered. And I must acknowledge,
Mr. Toogood, while saying this, that I have known,--have known with
heartfelt agony,--that at former times my wife has taken that from
my friend Mr. Arabin, with hand half-hidden from me, which I have
refused. Whether it be better to eat--the bread of charity,--or
not to eat bread at all, I, for myself, have no doubt," he said;
"but when the want strikes one's wife and children, and the charity
strikes only oneself, then there is a doubt." When he spoke thus, Mr.
Toogood got up, and thrusting his hands into his waistcoat pockets
walked about the room, exclaiming, "By George, by George, by George!"
But he still let the man go on with his story, and heard him out at
last to the end.

"And they committed you for trial at the next Barchester assizes?"
said the lawyer.

"They did."

"And you employed no lawyer before the magistrates?"

"None;--I refused to employ any one."

"You were wrong there, Mr. Crawley. I must be allowed to say that you
were wrong there."

"I may possibly have been so from your point of view, Mr. Toogood;
but permit me to explain. I--"

"It's no good explaining now. Of course you must employ a lawyer for
your defence,--an attorney who will put the case into the hands of
counsel."

"But that I cannot do, Mr. Toogood."

"You must do it. If you don't do it, your friends should do it for
you. If you don't do it, everybody will say you're mad. There isn't
a single solicitor you could find within half a mile of you at this
moment who wouldn't give you the same advice,--not a single man,
either, who has got a head on his shoulders worth a turnip."

When Mr. Crawley was told that madness would be laid to his charge if
he did not do as he was bid, his face became very black, and assumed
something of that look of determined obstinacy which it had worn when
he was standing in the presence of the bishop and Mrs. Proudie. "It
may be so," he said. "It may be as you say, Mr. Toogood. But these
neighbours of yours, as to whose collected wisdom you speak with so
much certainty, would hardly recommend me to indulge in a luxury for
which I have no means of paying."

"Who thinks about paying under such circumstances as these?"

"I do, Mr. Toogood."

"The wretchedest costermonger that comes to grief has a barrister in
a wig and gown to give him his chance of escape."

"But I am not a costermonger, Mr. Toogood,--though more wretched
perhaps than any costermonger now in existence. It is my lot to have
to endure the sufferings of poverty, and at the same time not to
be exempt from those feelings of honour to which poverty is seldom
subject. I cannot afford to call in legal assistance for which I
cannot pay,--and I will not do it."

"I'll carry the case through for you. It certainly is not just my
line of business,--but I'll see it carried through for you."

"Out of your own pocket?"

"Never mind; when I say I'll do a thing, I'll do it."

"No, Mr. Toogood; this thing you can not do. But do not suppose I am
the less grateful."

"What is it I can do then? Why do you come to me if you won't take my
advice?"

After this the conversation went on for a considerable time without
touching on any point which need be brought palpably before the
reader's eye. The attorney continued to beg the clergyman to have his
case managed in the usual way, and went so far as to tell him that
he would be ill-treating his wife and family if he continued to be
obstinate. But the clergyman was not shaken from his resolve, and was
at last able to ask Mr. Toogood what he had better do,--how he had
better attempt to defend himself,--on the understanding that no legal
aid was to be employed. When this question was at last asked in such
a way as to demand an answer, Mr. Toogood sat for a moment or two in
silence. He felt that an answer was not only demanded, but almost
enforced; and yet there might be much difficulty in giving it.

"Mr. Toogood," said Mr. Crawley, seeing the attorney's hesitation, "I
declare to you before God, that my only object will be to enable the
jury to know about this sad matter all that I know myself. If I could
open my breast to them I should be satisfied. But then a prisoner can
say nothing; and what he does say is ever accounted false."

"That is why you should have legal assistance."

"We had already come to a conclusion on that matter, as I thought,"
said Mr. Crawley.

Mr. Toogood paused for another moment or two, and then dashed at his
answer; or rather, dashed at a counter question. "Mr. Crawley, where
did you get the cheque? You must pardon me, you know; or, if you wish
it, I will not press the question. But so much hangs on that, you
know."

"Every thing would hang on it,--if I only knew."

"You mean that you forget?"

"Absolutely; totally. I wish, Mr. Toogood, I could explain to you the
toilsome perseverance with which I have cudgelled my poor brains,
endeavouring to extract from them some scintilla of memory that would
aid me."

"Could you have picked it up in the house?"

"No;--no; that I did not do. Dull as I am, I know so much. It was
mine of right, from whatever source it came to me. I know myself as
no one else can know me, in spite of the wise man's motto. Had I
picked up a cheque in my house, or on the road, I should not have
slept till I had taken steps to restore it to the seeming owner. So
much I can say. But, otherwise, I am in such matters so shandy-pated,
that I can trust myself to be sure of nothing. I thought;--I
certainly thought--"

"You thought what?"

"I thought that it had been given to me by my friend the dean. I
remember well that I was in his library at Barchester, and I was
somewhat provoked in spirit. There were lying on the floor hundreds
of volumes, all glittering with gold, and reeking with new leather
from the binders. He asked me to look at his toys. Why should I look
at them? There was a time, but the other day it seemed, when he had
been glad to borrow from me such treasures as I had. And it seemed to
me that he was heartless in showing me these things. Well; I need not
trouble you with all that."

"Go on;--go on. Let me hear it all, and I shall learn something."

"I know now how vain, how vile I was. I always know afterwards how
low the spirit has grovelled. I had gone to him then because I
had resolved to humble myself, and, for my wife's sake, to ask my
friend--for money. With words which were very awkward,--which no
doubt were ungracious--I had asked him, and he had bid me follow
him from his hall into his library. There he left me awhile, and on
returning told me with a smile that he had sent for money,--and, if
I can remember, the sum he named was fifty pounds."

"But it has turned out, as you say, that you have paid fifty pounds
with his money,--besides the cheque."

"That is true;--that is quite true. There is no doubt of that. But
as I was saying,--then he fell to talking about the books, and I was
angered. I was very sore in my heart. From the moment in which the
words of beggary had passed from my lips, I had repented. And he had
laughed and had taken it gaily. I turned upon him and told him that I
had changed my mind. I was grateful, but I would not have his money.
And so I prepared to go. But he argued with me, and would not let me
go,--telling me of my wife and of my children, and while he argued
there came a knock at the door, and something was handed in, and I
knew that it was the hand of his wife."

"It was the money, I suppose?"

"Yes, Mr. Toogood; it was the money. And I became the more uneasy,
because she herself is rich. I liked it the less because it seemed to
come from her hand. But I took it. What could I do when he reminded
me that I could not keep my parish unless certain sums were paid?
He gave me a little parcel in a cover, and I took it,--and left him
sorrowing. I had never before come quite to that;--though, indeed, it
had in fact been often so before. What was the difference whether the
alms were given into my hands or into my wife's?"

"You are too touchy about it all, Mr. Crawley."

"Of course I am. Do you try it, and see whether you will be touchy.
You have worked hard at your profession, I daresay."

"Well, yes; pretty well. To tell the truth, I have worked hard. By
George, yes! It's not so bad now as it used to be."

"But you have always earned your bread; bread for yourself, and bread
for your wife and little ones. You can buy tickets for the play."

"I couldn't always buy tickets, mind you."

"I have worked as hard, and yet I cannot get bread. I am older than
you, and I cannot earn my bare bread. Look at my clothes. If you had
to go and beg from Mr. Crump, would not you be touchy?"

"As it happens, Crump isn't so well off as I am."

"Never mind. But I took it, and went home, and for two days I did not
look at it. And then there came an illness upon me, and I know not
what passed. But two men who had been hard on me came to the house
when I was out, and my wife was in a terrible state; and I gave her
the money, and she went into Silverbridge and paid them."

"And this cheque was with what you gave her?"

"No; I gave her money in notes,--just fifty pounds. When I gave
it her, I thought I gave it all; and yet afterwards I thought I
remembered that in my illness I had found the cheque with the dean's
money. But it was not so."

"You are sure of that?"

"He has said that he put five notes of £10 each into the cover, and
such notes I certainly gave to my wife."

"Where then did you get the cheque?" Mr. Crawley again paused
before he answered. "Surely, if you will exert your mind, you will
remember," said the lawyer. "Where did you get the cheque?"

"I do not know."

Mr. Toogood threw himself back in his chair, took his knee up into
his lap to nurse it, and began to think of it. He sat thinking of it
for some minutes without a word,--perhaps for five minutes, though
the time seemed to be much longer to Mr. Crawley, who was, however,
determined that he would not interrupt him. And Mr. Toogood's
thoughts were at variance with Mr. Toogood's former words. Perhaps,
after all, this scheme of Mr. Crawley's,--or rather the mode of
defence on which he had resolved without any scheme,--might be the
best of which the case admitted. It might be well that he should go
into court without a lawyer. "He has convinced me of his innocence,"
Mr. Toogood said to himself, "and why should he not convince a
jury? He has convinced me, not because I am specially soft, or
because I love the man,--for as to that I dislike him rather than
otherwise;--but because there is either real truth in his words,
or else so well-feigned a show of truth that no jury can tell the
difference. I think it is true. By George, I think he did get the
twenty pounds honestly, and that he does not this moment know where
he got it. He may have put his finger into my eye; but, if so, why
not also into the eyes of a jury?" Then he released his leg, and
spoke something of his thoughts aloud. "It's a sad story," he said;
"a very sad story."

"Well, yes, it's sad enough. If you could see my house, you'd say
so."

"I haven't a doubt but what you're as innocent as I am." Mr. Toogood,
as he said this, felt a little twinge of conscience. He did believe
Mr. Crawley to be innocent, but he was not so sure of it as his words
would seem to imply. Nevertheless he repeated the words again;--"as
innocent as I am."

"I don't know," said Mr. Crawley. "I don't know. I think I am; but I
don't know."

"I believe you are. But you see the case is a very distressing one.
A jury has a right to say that the man in possession of a cheque
for twenty pounds should account for his possession of it. If I
understand the story aright, Mr. Soames will be able to prove that he
brought the cheque into your house, and, as far as he knows, never
took it out again."

"I suppose so; all the same, if he brought it in, then did he also
take it out again."

"I am saying what he will prove,--or, in other words, what he will
state upon oath. You can't contradict him. You can't get into the box
to do it,--even if that would be of any avail; and I am glad that you
cannot, as it would be of no avail. And you can put no one else into
the box who can do so."

"No; no."

"That is to say, we think you cannot do so. People can do so many
things that they don't think they can do; and can't do so many things
that they think that they can do! When will the dean be home?"

"I don't know."

"Before the trial?"

"I don't know. I have no idea."

"It's almost a toss-up whether he'd do more harm or good if he were
there."

"I wish he might be there if he has anything to say, whether it might
be for harm or good."

"And Mrs. Arabin;--she is with him?"

"They tell me she is not. She is in Europe. He is in Palestine."

"In Palestine, is he?"

"So they tell me. A dean can go where he likes. He has no cure of
souls to stand in the way of his pleasures."

"He hasn't,--hasn't he? I wish I were a dean; that is, if I were not
a lawyer. Might I write a line to the dean,--and to Mrs. Dean, if
it seemed fit? You wouldn't mind that? As you have come to see your
cousin at last,--and very glad I am that you have,--you must leave
him a little discretion. I won't say anything I oughtn't to say." Mr.
Crawley opposed this scheme for some time, but at last consented to
the proposition. "And I'll tell you what, Mr. Crawley; I am very fond
of cathedrals, I am indeed; and I have long wanted to see Barchester.
There's a very fine what-you-may-call-em; isn't there? Well; I'll
just run down at the assizes. We have nothing to do in London when
the judges are in the country,--of course." Mr. Toogood looked into
Mr. Crawley's eyes as he said this, to see if his iniquity were
detected, but the perpetual curate was altogether innocent in these
matters. "Yes; I'll just run down for a mouthful of fresh air. Of
course I shan't open my mouth in court. But I might say one word
to the dean, if he's there;--and one word to Mr. Soames. Who is
conducting the prosecution?" Mr. Crawley said that Mr. Walker was
doing so. "Walker, Walker, Walker? oh,--yes; Walker and Winthrop,
isn't it? A decent sort of man, I suppose?"

"I have heard nothing to his discredit, Mr. Toogood."

"And that's saying a great deal for a lawyer. Well, Mr. Crawley, if
nothing else comes out between this and that,--nothing, that is, that
shall clear your memory about that unfortunate bit of paper, you must
simply tell your story to the jury as you've told it to me. I don't
think any twelve men in England would convict you;--I don't indeed."

"You think they would not?"

"Of course I've only heard one side, Mr. Crawley."

"No,--no,--no, that is true."

"But judging as well as I can judge from one side, I don't think a
jury can convict you. At any rate I'll see you at Barchester, and
I'll write a line or two before the trial, just to find out anything
that can be found out. And you're sure you won't come and take a bit
of mutton with us in the Square? The girls would be delighted to see
you, and so would Maria." Mr. Crawley said that he was quite sure
he could not do that, and then having tendered reiterated thanks
to his new friend in words which were touching in spite of their
old-fashioned gravity, he took his leave, and walked back again to
the public-house at Paddington.

He returned home to Hogglestock on the same afternoon, reaching that
place at nine in the evening. During the whole of the day after
leaving Raymond's Buildings he was thinking of the lawyer, and of the
words which the lawyer had spoken. Although he had been disposed to
quarrel with Mr. Toogood on many points, although he had been more
than once disgusted by the attorney's bad taste, shocked by his low
morality, and almost insulted by his easy familiarity, still, when
the interview was over, he liked the attorney. When first Mr. Toogood
had begun to talk, he regretted very much that he had subjected
himself to the necessity of discussing his private affairs with
such a windbag of a man; but when he left the chamber he trusted Mr.
Toogood altogether, and was very glad that he had sought his aid. He
was tired and exhausted when he reached home, as he had eaten nothing
but a biscuit or two since his breakfast; but his wife got him food
and tea, and then asked him as to his success. "Was my cousin kind to
you?"

"Very kind,--more than kind,--perhaps somewhat too pressing in his
kindness. But I find no fault. God forbid that I should. He is, I
think, a good man, and certainly has been good to me."

"And what is to be done?"

"He will write to the dean."

"I am glad of that."

"And he will be at Barchester."

"Thank God for that."

"But not as my lawyer."

"Nevertheless, I thank God that some one will be there who will know
how to give you assistance and advice."




