
BY HEAVENS HE HAD BETTER NOT!


I must ask the reader to make the acquaintance of Major Grantly of
Cosby Lodge, before he is introduced to the family of Mr. Crawley, at
their parsonage in Hogglestock. It has been said that Major Grantly
had thrown a favourable eye on Grace Crawley,--by which report
occasion was given to all men and women in those parts to hint that
the Crawleys, with all their piety and humility, were very cunning,
and that one of the Grantlys was,--to say the least of it,--very
soft, admitted as it was throughout the county of Barsetshire,
that there was no family therein more widely awake to the affairs
generally of this world and the next combined, than the family of
which Archdeacon Grantly was the respected head and patriarch. Mrs.
Walker, the most good-natured woman in Silverbridge, had acknowledged
to her daughter that she could not understand it,--that she could not
see anything at all in Grace Crawley. Mr. Walker had shrugged his
shoulders and expressed a confident belief that Major Grantly had
not a shilling of his own beyond his half-pay and his late wife's
fortune, which was only six thousand pounds. Others, who were
ill-natured, had declared that Grace Crawley was little better than a
beggar, and that she could not possibly have acquired the manners of
a gentlewoman. Fletcher the butcher had wondered whether the major
would pay his future father-in-law's debts; and Dr. Tempest, the
old rector of Silverbridge, whose four daughters were all as yet
unmarried, had turned up his old nose, and had hinted that half-pay
majors did not get caught in marriage so easily as that.

Such and such like had been the expressions of the opinion of
men and women in Silverbridge. But the matter had been discussed
further afield than at Silverbridge, and had been allowed to intrude
itself as a most unwelcome subject into the family conclave of the
archdeacon's rectory. To those who have not as yet learned the fact
from the public character and well-appreciated reputation of the
man, let it be known that Archdeacon Grantly was at this time, as
he had been for many years previously, Archdeacon of Barchester and
Rector of Plumstead Episcopi. A rich and prosperous man he had ever
been,--though he also had had his sore troubles, as we all have,--his
having arisen chiefly from want of that higher ecclesiastical
promotion which his soul had coveted, and for which the whole tenour
of his life had especially fitted him. Now, in his green old age, he
had ceased to covet, but had not ceased to repine. He had ceased to
covet aught for himself, but still coveted much for his children; and
for him such a marriage as this which was now suggested for his son
was encompassed almost with the bitterness of death. "I think it
would kill me," he had said to his wife; "by heavens, I think it
would be my death!"

A daughter of the archdeacon had made a splendid matrimonial
alliance,--so splendid that its history was at the time known to all
the aristocracy of the county, and had not been altogether forgotten
by any of those who keep themselves well instructed in the details of
the peerage. Griselda Grantly had married Lord Dumbello, the eldest
son of the Marquis of Hartletop,--than whom no English nobleman was
more puissant, if broad acres, many castles, high title, and stars
and ribbons are any signs of puissance,--and she was now, herself,
Marchioness of Hartletop, with a little Lord Dumbello of her own. The
daughter's visits to the parsonage of her father were of necessity
rare, such necessity having come from her own altered sphere of life.
A Marchioness of Hartletop has special duties which will hardly
permit her to devote herself frequently to the humdrum society of a
clerical father and mother. That it would be so, father and mother
had understood when they sent the fortunate girl forth to a higher
world. But, now and again, since her August marriage, she had laid
her coroneted head upon one of the old rectory pillows for a night
or so, and on such occasions all the Plumsteadians had been loud in
praise of her condescension. Now it happened that when this second
and more aggravated blast of the evil wind reached the rectory,--the
renewed waft of the tidings as to Major Grantly's infatuation
regarding Miss Grace Crawley, which, on its renewal, seemed to bring
with it something of confirmation,--it chanced, I say, that at that
moment Griselda, Marchioness of Hartletop, was gracing the paternal
mansion. It need hardly be said that the father was not slow to
invoke such a daughter's counsel, and such a sister's aid.

I am not quite sure that the mother would have been equally quick to
ask her daughter's advice, had she been left in the matter entirely
to her own propensities. Mrs. Grantly had ever loved her daughter
dearly, and had been very proud of that great success in life which
Griselda had achieved; but in late years, the child had become,
as a woman, separate from the mother, and there had arisen, not
unnaturally, a break of that close confidence which in early years
had existed between them. Griselda, Marchioness of Hartletop,
was more than ever a daughter to the archdeacon, even though he
might never see her. Nothing could rob him of the honour of such a
progeny,--nothing, even though there had been actual estrangement
between them. But it was not so with Mrs. Grantly. Griselda had
done very well, and Mrs. Grantly had rejoiced; but she had lost her
child. Now the major, who had done well also, though in a much lesser
degree, was still her child, moving in the same sphere of life with
her, still dependent in a great degree upon his father's bounty, a
neighbour in the county, a frequent visitor at the parsonage, and
a visitor who could be received without any of that trouble which
attended the unfrequent comings of Griselda, the marchioness, to the
home of her youth. And for this reason Mrs. Grantly, terribly put out
as she was at the idea of a marriage between her son and one standing
so poorly in the world's esteem as Grace Crawley, would not have
brought forward the matter before her daughter, had she been left
to her own desires. A marchioness in one's family is a tower of
strength, no doubt; but there are counsellors so strong that we
do not wish to trust them, lest in the trusting we ourselves be
overwhelmed by their strength. Now Mrs. Grantly was by no means
willing to throw her influence into the hands of her titled daughter.

But the titled daughter was consulted and gave her advice. On the
occasion of the present visit to Plumstead she had consented to lay
her head for two nights on the parsonage pillows, and on the second
evening her brother the major was to come over from Cosby Lodge
to meet her. Before his coming the affair of Grace Crawley was
discussed.

"It would break my heart, Griselda," said the archdeacon,
piteously--"and your mother's."

"There is nothing against the girl's character," said Mrs. Grantly,
"and the father and mother are gentlefolks by birth; but such a
marriage for Henry would be very unseemly."

"To make it worse, there is this terrible story about him," said the
archdeacon.

"I don't suppose there is much in that," said Mrs. Grantly.

"I can't say. There is no knowing. They told me to-day in Barchester
that Soames is pressing the case against him."

"Who is Soames, papa?" asked the marchioness.

"He is Lord Lufton's man of business, my dear."

"Oh, Lord Lufton's man of business!" There was something of a sneer
in the tone of the lady's voice as she mentioned Lord Lufton's name.

"I am told," continued the archdeacon, "that Soames declares the
cheque was taken from a pocket-book which he left by accident in
Crawley's house."

"You don't mean to say, archdeacon, that you think that Mr.
Crawley--a clergyman--stole it!" said Mrs. Grantly.

"I don't say anything of the kind, my dear. But supposing Mr. Crawley
to be as honest as the sun, you wouldn't wish Henry to marry his
daughter."

"Certainly not," said the mother. "It would be an unfitting marriage.
The poor girl has had no advantages."

"He is not able even to pay his baker's bill. I always thought Arabin
was very wrong to place such a man in such a parish as Hogglestock.
Of course the family could not live there." The Arabin here spoken of
was Dr. Arabin, dean of Barchester. The dean and the archdeacon had
married sisters, and there was much intimacy between the families.

"After all it is only a rumour as yet," said Mrs. Grantly.

"Fothergill told me only yesterday, that he sees her almost every
day," said the father. "What are we to do, Griselda? You know how
headstrong Henry is." The marchioness sat quite still, looking at the
fire, and made no immediate answer to this address.

"There is nothing for it, but that you should tell him what you
think," said the mother.

"If his sister were to speak to him, it might do much," said the
archdeacon. To this Mrs. Grantly said nothing; but Mrs. Grantly's
daughter understood very well that her mother's confidence in her was
not equal to her father's. Lady Hartletop said nothing, but still
sat, with impassive face, and eyes fixed upon the fire. "I think
that if you were to speak to him, Griselda, and tell him that he
would disgrace his family, he would be ashamed to go on with such a
marriage," said the father. "He would feel, connected as he is with
Lord Hartletop--"

"I don't think he would feel anything about that," said Mrs. Grantly.

"I dare say not," said Lady Hartletop.

"I am sure he ought to feel it," said the father. They were all
silent, and sat looking at the fire.

"I suppose, papa, you allow Henry an income," said Lady Hartletop,
after a while.

"Indeed I do,--eight hundred a year."

"Then I think I should tell him that that must depend upon his
conduct. Mamma, if you won't mind ringing the bell, I will send
for Cecile, and go upstairs and dress." Then the marchioness went
upstairs to dress, and in about an hour the major arrived in his
dog-cart. He also was allowed to go upstairs to dress before anything
was said to him about his great offence.

"Griselda is right," said the archdeacon, speaking to his wife out of
his dressing-room. "She always was right. I never knew a young woman
with more sense than Griselda."

"But you do not mean to say that in any event you would stop Henry's
income?" Mrs. Grantly also was dressing, and made reply out of her
bedroom.

"Upon my word, I don't know. As a father I would do anything to
prevent such a marriage as that."

"But if he did marry her in spite of the threat? And he would if he
had once said so."

"Is a father's word, then, to go for nothing; and a father who allows
his son eight hundred a year? If he told the girl that he would be
ruined she couldn't hold him to it."

"My dear, they'd know as well as I do, that you would give way after
three months."

"But why should I give way? Good heavens--!"

"Of course you'd give way, and of course we should have the young
woman here, and of course we should make the best of it."

The idea of having Grace Crawley as a daughter at the Plumstead
Rectory was too much for the archdeacon, and he resented it by
additional vehemence in the tone of his voice, and a nearer personal
approach to the wife of his bosom. All unaccoutred as he was, he
stood in the doorway between the two rooms, and thence fulminated
at his wife his assurances that he would never allow himself to be
immersed in such a depth of humility as that she had suggested. "I
can tell you this, then, that if ever she comes here, I shall take
care to be away. I will never receive her here. You can do as you
please."

"That is just what I cannot do. If I could do as I pleased, I would
put a stop to it at once."

"It seems to me that you want to encourage him. A child about sixteen
years of age!"

"I am told she is nineteen."

"What does it matter if she was fifty-nine? Think of what her
bringing up has been. Think what it would be to have all the Crawleys
in our house for ever, and all their debts, and all their disgrace!"

"I do not know that they have ever been disgraced."

"You'll see. The whole county has heard of the affair of this twenty
pounds. Look at that dear girl upstairs, who has been such a comfort
to us. Do you think it would be fit that she and her husband should
meet such a one as Grace Crawley at our table?"

"I don't think it would do them a bit of harm," said Mrs. Grantly.
"But there would be no chance of that, seeing that Griselda's husband
never comes to us."

"He was here the year before last."

"And I never was so tired of a man in all my life."

"Then you prefer the Crawleys, I suppose. This is what you get from
Eleanor's teaching." Eleanor was the dean's wife, and Mrs. Grantly's
younger sister. "It has always been a sorrow to me that I ever
brought Arabin into the diocese."

"I never asked you to bring him, archdeacon. But nobody was so glad
as you when he proposed to Eleanor."

"Well, the long and the short of it is this, I shall tell Henry
to-night that if he makes a fool of himself with this girl, he must
not look to me any longer for an income. He has about six hundred
a year of his own, and if he chooses to throw himself away, he had
better go and live in the south of France, or in Canada, or where he
pleases. He shan't come here."

"I hope he won't marry the girl, with all my heart," said Mrs.
Grantly.

"He had better not. By heavens, he had better not!"

"But if he does, you'll be the first to forgive him."

On hearing this the archdeacon slammed the door, and retired to his
washing apparatus. At the present moment he was very angry with his
wife, but then he was so accustomed to such anger, and was so well
aware that it in truth meant nothing, that it did not make him
unhappy. The archdeacon and Mrs. Grantly had now been man and
wife for more than a quarter of a century, and had never in truth
quarrelled. He had the most profound respect for her judgment, and
the most implicit reliance on her conduct. She had never yet offended
him, or caused him to repent the hour in which he had made her Mrs.
Grantly. But she had come to understand that she might use a woman's
privilege with her tongue; and she used it,--not altogether to his
comfort. On the present occasion he was the more annoyed because he
felt that she might be right. "It would be a positive disgrace, and
I never would see him again," he said to himself. And yet as he said
it, he knew that he would not have the strength of character to carry
him through a prolonged quarrel with his son. "I never would see
her,--never, never!" he said to himself. "And then such an opening as
he might have at his sister's house."

Major Grantly had been a successful man in life,--with the one
exception of having lost the mother of his child within a twelvemonth
of his marriage and within a few hours of that child's birth. He had
served in India as a very young man, and had been decorated with the
Victoria Cross. Then he had married a lady with some money, and had
left the active service of the army, with the concurring advice of
his own family and that of his wife. He had taken a small place in
his father's county, but the wife for whose comfort he had taken it
had died before she was permitted to see it. Nevertheless he had gone
to reside there, hunting a good deal and farming a little, making
himself popular in the district, and keeping up the good name of
Grantly in a successful way, till--alas,--it had seemed good to him
to throw those favouring eyes on poor Grace Crawley. His wife had
now been dead just two years, and as he was still under thirty,
no one could deny it would be right that he should marry again.
No one did deny it. His father had hinted that he ought to do so,
and had generously whispered that if some little increase to the
major's present income were needed, he might possibly be able to do
something. "What is the good of keeping it?" the archdeacon had said
in liberal after-dinner warmth; "I only want it for your brother and
yourself." The brother was a clergyman.

And the major's mother had strongly advised him to marry again
without loss of time. "My dear Henry," she had said, "you'll never be
younger, and youth does go for something. As for dear little Edith,
being a girl, she is almost no impediment. Do you know those two
girls at Chaldicotes?"

"What, Mrs. Thorne's nieces?"

"No; they are not her nieces but her cousins. Emily Dunstable is very
handsome;--and as for money--!"

"But what about birth, mother?"

"One can't have everything, my dear."

"As far as I am concerned, I should like to have everything or
nothing," the major had said laughing. Now for him to think of Grace
Crawley after that,--of Grace Crawley who had no money, and no
particular birth, and not even beauty itself,--so at least Mrs.
Grantly said,--who had not even enjoyed the ordinary education of
a lady, was too bad. Nothing had been wanting to Emily Dunstable's
education, and it was calculated that she would have at least twenty
thousand pounds on the day of her marriage.

The disappointment to the mother would be the more sore because
she had gone to work upon her little scheme with reference to Miss
Emily Dunstable, and had at first, as she thought, seen her way to
success,--to success in spite of the disparaging words which her
son had spoken to her. Mrs. Thorne's house at Chaldicotes,--or Dr.
Thorne's house as it should, perhaps, be more properly called, for
Dr. Thorne was the husband of Mrs. Thorne,--was in these days the
pleasantest house in Barsetshire. No one saw so much company as the
Thornes, or spent so much money in so pleasant a way. The great
county families, the Pallisers and the De Courcys, the Luftons
and the Greshams, were no doubt grander, and some of them were
perhaps richer than the Chaldicote Thornes,--as they were called to
distinguish them from the Thornes of Ullathorne; but none of these
people were so pleasant in their ways, so free in their hospitality,
or so easy in their modes of living, as the doctor and his wife.
When first Chaldicotes, a very old country seat, had by the chances
of war fallen into their hands and been newly furnished, and newly
decorated, and newly gardened, and newly greenhoused and hot-watered
by them, many of the county people had turned up their noses at
them. Dear old Lady Lufton had done so, and had been greatly
grieved,--saying nothing, however, of her grief, when her son and
daughter-in-law had broken away from her, and submitted themselves to
the blandishments of the doctor's wife. And the Grantlys had stood
aloof, partly influenced, no doubt, by their dear and intimate old
friend Miss Monica Thorne of Ullathorne, a lady of the very old
school, who, though good as gold and kind as charity, could not
endure that an interloping Mrs. Thorne, who never had a grandfather,
should come to honour and glory in the county, simply because of her
riches. Miss Monica Thorne stood out, but Mrs. Grantly gave way, and
having once given way found that Dr. Thorne, and Mrs. Thorne, and
Emily Dunstable, and Chaldicote House together, were very charming.
And the major had been once there with her, and had made himself
very pleasant, and there had certainly been some little passage
of incipient love between him and Miss Dunstable, as to which Mrs.
Thorne, who managed everything, seemed to be well pleased. This had
been after the first mention made by Mrs. Grantly to her son of Emily
Dunstable's name, but before she had heard any faintest whispers of
his fancy for Grace Crawley; and she had therefore been justified
in hoping,--almost in expecting, that Emily Dunstable would be her
daughter-in-law, and was therefore the more aggrieved when this
terrible Crawley peril first opened itself before her eyes.




