
A DOUBLE PLEDGE.


The archdeacon, as he walked across from the Court to the parsonage,
was very thoughtful and his steps were very slow. This idea of seeing
Miss Crawley herself had been suggested to him suddenly, and he had
to determine how he would bear himself towards her, and what he would
say to her. Lady Lufton had beseeched him to be gentle with her. Was
the mission one in which gentleness would be possible? Must it not be
his object to make this young lady understand that she could not be
right in desiring to come into his family and share in all his good
things when she had got no good things of her own,--nothing but evil
things to bring with her? And how could this be properly explained to
the young lady in gentle terms? Must he not be round with her, and
give her to understand in plain words,--the plainest which he could
use,--that she would not get his good things, though she would most
certainly impose the burden of all her evil things on the man whom
she was proposing to herself as a husband. He remembered very well as
he went, that he had been told that Miss Crawley had herself refused
the offer, feeling herself to be unfit for the honour tendered to
her; but he suspected the sincerity of such a refusal. Calculating
in his own mind the unreasonably great advantages which would be
conferred on such a young lady as Miss Crawley by a marriage with
his son, he declared to himself that any girl must be very wicked
indeed who should expect, or even accept, so much more than was her
due;--but nevertheless he could not bring himself to believe that
any girl, when so tempted, would, in sincerity, decline to commit
this great wickedness. If he was to do any good by seeing Miss
Crawley, must it not consist in a proper explanation to her of the
selfishness, abomination, and altogether damnable blackness of such
wickedness as this on the part of a young woman in her circumstances?
"Heaven and earth!" he must say, "here are you, without a penny in
your pocket, with hardly decent raiment on your back, with a thief
for your father, and you think that you are to come and share in
all the wealth that the Grantlys have amassed, that you are to have
a husband with broad acres, a big house, and game preserves, and
become one of a family whose name has never been touched by a single
accusation,--no, not by a suspicion? No;--injustice such as that
shall never be done betwixt you and me. You may wring my heart, and
you may ruin my son; but the broad acres and the big house, and the
game preserves, and the rest of it, shall never be your reward for
doing so." How was all that to be told effectively to a young woman
in gentle words? And then how was a man in the archdeacon's position
to be desirous of gentle words,--gentle words which would not be
efficient,--when he knew well in his heart of hearts that he had
nothing but his threats on which to depend. He had no more power of
disinheriting his own son for such an offence as that contemplated
than he had of blowing out his own brains, and he knew that it was
so. He was a man incapable of such persistency of wrath against one
whom he loved. He was neither cruel enough nor strong enough to do
such a thing. He could only threaten to do it, and make what best use
he might of threats, whilst threats might be of avail. In spite of
all that he had said to his wife, to Lady Lufton, and to himself, he
knew very well that if his son did sin in this way he, the father,
would forgive the sin of the son.

In going across from the front gate of the Court to the parsonage
there was a place where three roads met, and on this spot there stood
a finger-post. Round this finger-post there was now pasted a placard,
which at once arrested the archdeacon's eye:--"Cosby Lodge--Sale
of furniture--Growing crops to be sold on the grounds. Three
hunters. A brown gelding warranted for saddle or harness!"--The
archdeacon himself had given the brown gelding to his son, as a great
treasure.--"Three Alderney cows, two cow-calves, a low phaeton, a
gig, two ricks of hay." In this fashion were proclaimed in odious
details all those comfortable additions to a gentleman's house in the
country, with which the archdeacon was so well acquainted. Only last
November he had recommended his son to buy a certain new-invented
clod-crusher, and the clod-crusher had of course been bought. The
bright blue paint upon it had not as yet given way to the stains of
the ordinary farmyard muck and mire;--and here was the clod-crusher
advertised for sale! The archdeacon did not want his son to leave
Cosby Lodge. He knew well enough that his son need not leave Cosby
Lodge. Why had the foolish fellow been in such a hurry with his
hideous ill-conditioned advertisements? Gentle! How was he in such
circumstances to be gentle? He raised his umbrella and poked angrily
at the disgusting notice. The iron ferule caught the paper at a chink
in the post, and tore it from the top to the bottom. But what was the
use? A horrid ugly bill lying torn in such a spot would attract only
more attention than one fixed to a post. He could not condescend,
however, to give to it further attention, but passed on up to the
parsonage. Gentle, indeed!

Nevertheless Archdeacon Grantly was a gentleman, and never yet had
dealt more harshly with any woman than we have sometimes seen him do
with his wife,--when he would say to her an angry word or two with
a good deal of marital authority. His wife, who knew well what his
angry words were worth, never even suggested to herself that she had
cause for complaint on that head. Had she known that the archdeacon
was about to undertake such a mission as this which he had now in
hand, she would not have warned him to be gentle. She, indeed, would
have strongly advised him not to undertake the mission, cautioning
him that the young lady would probably get the better of him.

"Grace, my dear," said Mrs. Robarts, coming up into the nursery in
which Miss Crawley was sitting with the children, "come out here a
moment, will you?" Then Grace left the children and went out into the
passage. "My dear, there is a gentleman in the drawing-room who asks
to see you."

"A gentleman, Mrs. Robarts! What gentleman?" But Grace, though she
asked the question, conceived that the gentleman must be Henry
Grantly. Her mind did not suggest to her the possibility of any other
gentleman coming to see her.

"You must not be surprised, or allow yourself to be frightened."

"Oh, Mrs. Robarts, who is it?"

"It is Major Grantly's father."

"The archdeacon?"

"Yes, dear; Archdeacon Grantly. He is in the drawing-room."

"Must I see him, Mrs. Robarts?"

"Well, Grace,--I think you must. I hardly know how you can refuse. He
is an intimate friend of everybody here at Framley."

"What will he say to me?"

"Nay; that I cannot tell. I suppose you know--"

"He has come, no doubt, to bid me have nothing to say to his son. He
need not have troubled himself. But he may say what he likes. I am
not a coward, and I will go to him."

"Stop a moment, Grace. Come into my room for an instant. The children
have pulled your hair about." But Grace, though she followed Mrs.
Robarts into the bedroom, would have nothing done to her hair. She
was too proud for that,--and we may say, also, too little confident
in any good which such resources might effect on her behalf. "Never
mind about that," she said. "What am I to say to him?" Mrs. Robarts
paused before she replied, feeling that the matter was one which
required some deliberation. "Tell me what I must say to him?" said
Grace, repeating her question.

"I hardly know what your own feelings are, my dear."

"Yes, you do. You do know. If I had all the world to give, I would
give it all to Major Grantly."

"Tell him that, then."

"No, I will not tell him that. Never mind about my frock, Mrs.
Robarts. I do not care for that. I will tell him that I love his
son and his granddaughter too well to injure them. I will tell him
nothing else. I might as well go now." Mrs. Robarts, as she looked at
Grace, was astonished at the serenity of her face. And yet when her
hand was on the drawing-room door Grace hesitated, looked back, and
trembled. Mrs. Robarts blew a kiss to her from the stairs; and then
the door was opened, and the girl found herself in the presence of
the archdeacon. He was standing on the rug, with his back to the
fire, and his heavy ecclesiastical hat was placed on the middle of
the round table. The hat caught Grace's eye at the moment of her
entrance, and she felt that all the thunders of the Church were
contained within it. And then the archdeacon himself was so big and
so clerical, and so imposing! Her father's aspect was severe, but the
severity of her father's face was essentially different from that
expressed by the archdeacon. Whatever impression came from her father
came from the man himself. There was no outward adornment there;
there was, so to say, no wig about Mr. Crawley. Now the archdeacon
was not exactly adorned; but he was so thoroughly imbued with high
clerical belongings and sacerdotal fitnesses as to appear always as
a walking, sitting, or standing impersonation of parsondom. To poor
Grace, as she entered the room, he appeared to be an impersonation of
parsondom in its severest aspect.

"Miss Crawley, I believe?" said he.

"Yes, sir," said she, curtseying ever so slightly, as she stood
before him at some considerable distance.

His first idea was that his son must be indeed a fool if he was going
to give up Cosby Lodge and all Barsetshire, and retire to Pau, for so
slight and unattractive a creature as he now saw before him. But this
idea stayed with him only for a moment. As he continued to gaze at
her during the interview he came to perceive that there was very
much more than he had perceived at the first glance, and that his
son, after all, had had eyes to see, though perhaps not a heart to
understand.

"Will you not take a chair?" he said. Then Grace sat down, still at
a distance from the archdeacon, and he kept his place upon the rug.
He felt that there would be a difficulty in making her feel the
full force of his eloquence all across the room; and yet he did
not know how to bring himself nearer to her. She became suddenly
very important in his eyes, and he was to some extent afraid of
her. She was so slight, so meek, so young; and yet there was about
her something so beautifully feminine,--and, withal, so like a
lady,--that he felt instinctively that he could not attack her with
harsh words. Had her lips been full, and her colour high, and had
her eyes rolled, had she put forth against him any of that ordinary
artillery with which youthful feminine batteries are charged, he
would have been ready to rush to the combat. But this girl, about
whom his son had gone mad, sat there as passively as though she
were conscious of the possession of no artillery. There was not a
single gun fired from beneath her eyelids. He knew not why, but he
respected his son now more than he had respected him for the last two
months;--more, perhaps, than he had ever respected him before. He was
as eager as ever against the marriage;--but in thinking of his son in
what he said and did after these few first moments of the interview,
he ceased to think of him with contempt. The creature before him was
a woman who grew in his opinion till he began to feel that she was in
truth fit to be the wife of his son--if only she were not a pauper,
and the daughter of a mad curate, and, alas! too probably, of a
thief. Though his feeling towards the girl was changed, his duty to
himself, his family, and his son, was the same as ever, and therefore
he began his task.

"Perhaps you had not expected to see me?" he said.

"No, indeed, sir."

"Nor had I intended when I came over here to call on my old friend,
Lady Lufton, to come up to this house. But as I knew that you were
here, Miss Crawley, I thought that upon the whole it would be better
that I should see you." Then he paused as though he expected that
Grace would say something; but Grace had nothing to say. "Of course
you must understand, Miss Crawley, that I should not venture to speak
to you on this subject unless I myself were very closely interested
in it." He had not yet said what was the subject, and it was not
probable that Grace should give him any assistance by affecting to
understand this without direct explanation from him. She sat quite
motionless, and did not even aid him by showing by her altered colour
that she understood his purpose. "My son has told me," said he, "that
he has professed an attachment for you, Miss Crawley."

Then there was another pause, and Grace felt that she was compelled
to say something. "Major Grantly has been very good to me," she said,
and then she hated herself for having uttered words which were so
tame and unwomanly in their spirit. Of course her lover's father
would despise her for having so spoken. After all it did not much
signify. If he would only despise her and go away, it would perhaps
be for the best.

"I do not know about being good," said the archdeacon. "I think he is
good. I think he means to be good."

"I am sure he is good," said Grace, warmly.

"You know he has a daughter, Miss Crawley?"

"Oh, yes; I know Edith well."

"Of course his first duty is to her. Is it not? And he owes much to
his family. Do you not feel that?"

"Of course I feel it, sir." The poor girl had always heard Dr.
Grantly spoken of as the archdeacon, but she did not in the least
know what she ought to call him.

"Now, Miss Crawley, pray listen to me; I will speak to you very
openly. I must speak to you openly, because it is my duty on my son's
behalf--but I will endeavour to speak to you kindly also. Of yourself
I have heard nothing but what is favourable, and there is no reason
as yet why I should not respect and esteem you." Grace told herself
that she would do nothing which ought to forfeit his respect and
esteem, but that she did not care two straws whether his respect and
esteem were bestowed on her or not. She was striving after something
very different from that. "If my son were to marry you, he would
greatly injure himself, and would very greatly injure his child."
Again he paused. He had told her to listen, and she was resolved that
she would listen,--unless he should say something which might make a
word from her necessary at the moment. "I do not know whether there
does at present exist any engagement between you?"

"There is no engagement, sir."

"I am glad of that,--very glad of it. I do not know whether you are
aware that my son is dependent upon me for the greater part of his
income. It is so, and as I am so circumstanced with my son, of course
I feel the closest possible concern in his future prospects." The
archdeacon did not know how to explain clearly why the fact of his
making a son an annual allowance should give him a warmer interest
in his son's affairs than he might have had had the major been
altogether independent of him; but he trusted that Grace would
understand this by her own natural lights. "Now, Miss Crawley, of
course I cannot wish to say a word that shall hurt your feelings. But
there are reasons--"

"I know," said she, interrupting him. "Papa is accused of stealing
money. He did not steal it, but people think he did. And then we are
so very poor."

"You do understand me then,--and I feel grateful; I do indeed."

"I don't think our being poor ought to signify a bit," said Grace.
"Papa is a gentleman and a clergyman, and mamma is a lady."

"But, my dear--"

"I know I ought not to be your son's wife as long as people think
that papa stole the money. If he had stolen it, I ought never to be
Major Grantly's wife,--or anybody's wife. I know that very well. And
as for Edith,--I would sooner die than do anything that would be bad
to her."

The archdeacon had now left the rug, and advanced till he was
almost close to the chair on which Grace was sitting. "My dear," he
said, "what you say does you very much honour,--very much honour
indeed." Now that he was close to her, he could look into her
eyes, and he could see the exact form of her features, and could
understand,--could not help understanding,--the character of her
countenance. It was a noble face, having in it nothing that was poor,
nothing that was mean, nothing that was shapeless. It was a face that
promised infinite beauty, with a promise that was on the very verge
of fulfilment. There was a play about her mouth as she spoke, and a
curl in her nostril as the eager words came from her, which almost
made the selfish father give way. Why had they not told him that
she was such a one as this? Why had not Henry himself spoken of the
speciality of her beauty? No man in England knew better than the
archdeacon the difference between beauty of one kind and beauty
of another kind in a woman's face,--the one beauty, which comes
from health and youth and animal spirits, and which belongs to the
miller's daughter, and the other beauty, which shows itself in fine
lines and a noble spirit,--the beauty which comes from breeding.
"What you say does you very much honour indeed," said the archdeacon.

"I should not mind at all about being poor," said Grace.

"No; no; no," said the archdeacon.

"Poor as we are,--and no clergyman, I think, ever was so poor,--I
should have done as your son asked me at once, if it had been only
that,--because I love him."

"If you love him you will not wish to injure him."

"I will not injure him. Sir, there is my promise." And now as she
spoke she rose from her chair, and standing close to the archdeacon,
laid her hand very lightly on the sleeve of his coat. "There is my
promise. As long as people say that papa stole the money, I will
never marry your son. There."

The archdeacon was still looking down at her, and feeling the slight
touch of her fingers, raised his arm a little as though to welcome
the pressure. He looked into her eyes, which were turned eagerly
towards his, and when doing so was quite sure that the promise would
be kept. It would have been sacrilege,--he felt that it would have
been sacrilege,--to doubt such a promise. He almost relented. His
soft heart, which was never very well under his own control, gave
way so far that he was nearly moved to tell her that, on his son's
behalf, he acquitted her of the promise. What could any man's son do
better than have such a woman for his wife? It would have been of no
avail had he made her such offer. The pledge she had given had not
been wrung from her by his influence, nor could his influence have
availed aught with her towards the alteration of her purpose. It was
not the archdeacon who had taught her that it would not be her duty
to take disgrace into the house of the man she loved. As he looked
down upon her face two tears formed themselves in his eyes, and
gradually trickled down his old nose. "My dear," he said, "if this
cloud passes away from you, you shall come to us and be my daughter."
And thus he also pledged himself. There was a dash of generosity
about the man, in spite of his selfishness, which always made him
desirous of giving largely to those who gave largely to him. He would
fain that his gifts should be the bigger, if it were possible. He
longed at this moment to tell her that the dirty cheque should go for
nothing. He would have done it, I think, but that it was impossible
for him so to speak in her presence of that which moved her so
greatly.

He had contrived that her hand should fall from his arm into his
grasp, and now for a moment he held it. "You are a good girl," he
said--"a dear, dear, good girl. When this cloud has passed away, you
shall come to us and be our daughter."

"But it will never pass away," said Grace.

[Illustration: "But it will never pass away," said Grace.]

"Let us hope that it may. Let us hope that it may." Then he stooped
over her and kissed her, and leaving the room, got out into the hall
and thence into the garden, and so away, without saying a word of
adieu to Mrs. Robarts.

As he walked across to the Court, whither he was obliged to go,
because of his chaise, he was lost in surprise at what had occurred.
He had gone to the parsonage, hating the girl, and despising his son.
Now, as he retraced his steps, his feelings were altogether changed.
He admired the girl,--and as for his son, even his anger was for the
moment altogether gone. He would write to his son at once and implore
him to stop the sale. He would tell his son all that had occurred, or
rather would make Mrs. Grantly do so. In respect to his son he was
quite safe. He thought at that moment that he was safe. There would
be no use in hurling further threats at him. If Crawley were found
guilty of stealing the money, there was the girl's promise. If he
were acquitted, there was his own pledge. He remembered perfectly
well that the girl had said more than this,--that she had not
confined her assurance to the verdict of a jury, that she had
protested that she would not accept Major Grantly's hand as long
as people thought that her father had stolen the cheque; but the
archdeacon felt that it would be ignoble to hold her closely to her
words. The event, according to his ideas of the compact, was to
depend upon the verdict of the jury. If the jury should find Mr.
Crawley not guilty, all objection on his part to the marriage was to
be withdrawn. And he would keep his word! In such case it should be
withdrawn.

When he came to the rags of the auctioneer's bill, which he had
before torn down with his umbrella, he stopped a moment to consider
how he would act at once. In the first place he would tell his son
that his threats were withdrawn, and would ask him to remain at Cosby
Lodge. He would write the letter as he passed through Barchester,
on his way home, so that his son might receive it on the following
morning; and he would refer the major to his mother for a full
explanation of the circumstances. Those odious bills must be removed
from every barn-door and wall in the county. At the present moment
his anger against his son was chiefly directed against his ill-judged
haste in having put up those ill-omened posters. Then he paused to
consider what must be his wish as to the verdict of the jury. He had
pledged himself to abide by the verdict, and he could not but have a
wish on the subject. Could he desire in his heart that Mr. Crawley
should be found guilty? He stood still for a moment thinking of this,
and then he walked on, shaking his head. If it might be possible he
would have no wish on the subject whatsoever.

"Well!" said Lady Lufton, stopping him in the passage,--"have you
seen her?"

"Yes; I have seen her."

"Well?"

"She is a good girl,--a very good girl. I am in a great hurry, and
hardly know how to tell you more now."

"You say that she is a good girl?"

"I say that she is a very good girl. An angel could not have behaved
better. I will tell you all some day, Lady Lufton, but I can hardly
tell you now."

When the archdeacon was gone old Lady Lufton confided to young Lady
Lufton her very strong opinion that many months would not be gone by
before Grace Crawley would be the mistress of Cosby Lodge. "It will
be great promotion," said the old lady, with a little toss of her
head.

When Grace was interrogated afterwards by Mrs. Robarts as to what
had passed between her and the archdeacon she had very little to
say as to the interview. "No, he did not scold me," she replied to
an inquiry from her friend. "But he spoke about your engagement?"
said Mrs. Robarts. "There is no engagement," said Grace. "But I
suppose you acknowledged, my dear, that a future engagement is
quite possible?" "I told him, Mrs. Robarts," Grace answered, after
hesitating for a moment, "that I would never marry his son as long
as papa was suspected by any one in the world of being a thief. And
I will keep my word." But she said nothing to Mrs. Robarts of the
pledge which the archdeacon had made to her.




