
MADALINA'S HEART IS BLEEDING.


John Eames, as soon as he had left Mrs. Arabin at the hotel and had
taken his travelling-bag to his own lodgings, started off for his
uncle Toogood's house. There he found Mrs. Toogood, not in the most
serene state of mind as to her husband's absence. Mr. Toogood had
now been at Barchester for the best part of a week,--spending a good
deal of money at the inn. Mrs. Toogood was quite sure that he must
be doing that. Indeed, how could he help himself? Johnny remarked
that he did not see how in such circumstances his uncle was to help
himself. And then Mr. Toogood had only written one short scrap of a
letter,--just three words, and they were written in triumph. "Crawley
is all right, and I think I've got the real Simon Pure by the heels."
"It's all very well, John," Mrs. Toogood said; "and of course it
would be a terrible thing to the family if anybody connected with
it were made out to be a thief." "It would be quite dreadful," said
Johnny. "Not that I ever looked upon the Crawleys as connections of
ours. But, however, let that pass. I'm sure I'm very glad that your
uncle should have been able to be of service to them. But there's
reason in the roasting of eggs, and I can tell you that money is
not so plenty in this house, that your uncle can afford to throw it
into the Barchester gutters. Think what twelve children are, John.
It might be all very well if Toogood were a bachelor, and if some
lord had left him a fortune." John Eames did not stay very long in
Tavistock Square. His cousins Polly and Lucy were gone to the play
with Mr. Summerkin, and his aunt was not in one of her best humours.
He took his uncle's part as well as he could, and then left Mrs.
Toogood. The little allusion to Lord De Guest's generosity had not
been pleasant to him. It seemed to rob him of all his own merit. He
had been rather proud of his journey to Italy, having contrived to
spend nearly forty pounds in ten days. He had done everything in the
most expensive way, feeling that every napoleon wasted had been laid
out on behalf of Mr. Crawley. But, as Mrs. Toogood had just told
him, all this was nothing to what Toogood was doing. Toogood with
twelve children was living at his own charges at Barchester, and
was neglecting his business besides. "There's Mr. Crump," said Mrs.
Toogood. "Of course he doesn't like it, and what can I say to him
when he comes to me?" This was not quite fair on the part of Mrs.
Toogood, as Mr. Crump had not troubled her even once as yet since her
husband's departure.

What was Johnny to do, when he left Tavistock Square? His club was
open to him. Should he go to his club, play a game of billiards, and
have some supper? When he asked himself the question he knew that he
would not go to his club, and yet he pretended to doubt about it, as
he made his way to a cabstand in Tottenham Court Road. It would be
slow, he told himself, to go to his club. He would have gone to see
Lily Dale, only that his intimacy with Mrs. Thorne was not sufficient
to justify his calling at her house between nine and ten o'clock at
night. But, as he must go somewhere,--and as his intimacy with Lady
Demolines was, he thought, sufficient to justify almost anything,--he
would go to Bayswater. I regret to say that he had written a
mysterious note from Paris to Madalina Demolines, saying that he
should be in London on this very night, and that it was just on the
cards that he might make his way up to Porchester Terrace before
he went to bed. The note was mysterious, because it had neither
beginning nor ending. It did not contain even initials. It was
written like a telegraph message, and was about as long. It was the
kind of thing Miss Demolines liked, Johnny thought; and there could
be no reason why he should not gratify her. It was her favourite
game. Some people like whist, some like croquet, and some like
intrigue. Madalina would probably have called it romance,--because by
nature she was romantic. John, who was made of sterner stuff, laughed
at this. He knew that there was no romance in it. He knew that he
was only amusing himself, and gratifying her at the same time, by
a little innocent pretence. He told himself that it was his nature
to prefer the society of women to that of men. He would have liked
the society of Lily Dale, no doubt, much better than that of Miss
Demolines; but as the society of Lily Dale was not to be had at that
moment, the society of Miss Demolines was the best substitute within
his reach. So he got into a cab and had himself driven to Porchester
Terrace. "Is Lady Demolines at home?" he said to the servant. He
always asked for Lady Demolines. But the page who was accustomed to
open the door for him was less false, being young, and would now
tell him, without any further fiction, that Miss Madalina was in
the drawing-room. Such was the answer he got from the page on this
evening. What Madalina did with her mother on these occasions he had
never yet discovered. There used to be some little excuses given
about Lady Demolines' state of health, but latterly Madalina had
discontinued her references to her mother's headaches. She was
standing in the centre of the drawing-room when he entered it, with
both her hands raised, and an almost terrible expression of mystery
in her face. Her hair, however, had been very carefully arranged
so as to fall with copious carelessness down her shoulders, and
altogether she was looking her best. "Oh, John," she said. She called
him John by accident in the tumult of the moment. "Have you heard
what has happened? But of course you have heard it."

"Heard what? I have heard nothing," said Johnny, arrested almost
in the doorway by the nature of the question,--and partly also, no
doubt, by the tumult of the moment. He had no idea how terrible
a tragedy was in truth in store for him; but he perceived that
the moment was to be tumultuous, and that he must carry himself
accordingly.

"Come in, and close the door," she said. He came in and closed the
door. "Do you mean to say that you haven't heard what has happened in
Hook Court?"

"No;--what has happened in Hook Court?" Miss Demolines threw herself
back into an arm-chair, closed her eyes, and clasped both her hands
upon her forehead. "What has happened in Hook Court?" said Johnny,
walking up to her.

"I do not think I can bring myself to tell you," she answered.

Then he took one of her hands down from her forehead and held it in
his,--which she allowed passively. She was thinking, no doubt, of
something far different from that.

"I never saw you looking better in my life," said Johnny.

"Don't," said she. "How can you talk in that way, when my heart
is bleeding,--bleeding." Then she pulled away her hand, and again
clasped it with the other upon her forehead.

"But why is your heart bleeding? What has happened in Hook Court?"
Still she answered nothing, but she sobbed violently and the heaving
of her bosom showed how tumultuous was the tumult within it. "You
don't mean to say that Dobbs Broughton has come to grief;--that he's
to be sold out?"

"Man," said Madalina, jumping from her chair, standing at her full
height, and stretching out both her arms, "he has destroyed himself!"
The revelation was at last made with so much tragic propriety, in
so excellent a tone, and with such an absence of all the customary
redundances of commonplace relation, that I think that she must have
rehearsed the scene,--either with her mother or with the page. Then
there was a minute's silence, during which she did not move even an
eyelid. She held her outstretched hands without dropping a finger
half an inch. Her face was thrust forward, her chin projecting, with
tragic horror; but there was no vacillation even in her chin. She did
not wink an eye, or alter to the breadth of a hair the aperture of
her lips. Surely she was a great genius if she did it all without
previous rehearsal. Then, before he had thought of words in which to
answer her, she let her hands fall by her side, she closed her eyes,
and shook her head, and fell back again into her chair. "It is too
horrible to be spoken of,--to be thought about," she said. "I could
not have brought myself to tell the tale to a living being,--except
to you."

This would naturally have been flattering to Johnny had it not been
that he was in truth absorbed by the story which he had heard.

"Do you mean to tell me," he said, "that Broughton has--committed
suicide?" She could not speak of it again, but nodded her head at him
thrice, while her eyes were still closed. "And how was the manner of
it?" said he, asking the question in a low voice. He could not even
as yet quite bring himself to believe it. Madalina was so fond of a
little playful intrigue, that even this story might have something in
it of the nature of fiction. He was not quite sure of the facts, and
yet he was shocked by what he had heard.

"Would you have me repeat to you all the bloody details of that
terrible scene?" she said. "It is impossible. Go to your friend
Dalrymple. He will tell you. He knows it all. He has been with Maria
all through. I wish,--I wish it had not been so." But nevertheless
she did bring herself to narrate all the details with something more
of circumstance than Eames desired. She soon succeeded in making him
understand that the tragedy of Hook Court was a reality, and that
poor Dobbs Broughton had brought his career to an untimely end. She
had heard everything,--having indeed gone to Musselboro in the City,
and having penetrated even to the sanctum of Mr. Bangles. To Mr.
Bangles she had explained that she was bosom-friend of the widow
of the unfortunate man, and that it was her miserable duty to make
herself the mistress of all the circumstances. Mr. Bangles,--the
reader may remember him, Burton and Bangles, who kept the stores
for Himalaya wines at 22_s._ 6_d._ the dozen, in Hook Court,--was a
bachelor, and rather liked the visit, and told Miss Demolines very
freely all he had seen. And when she suggested that it might be
expedient for the sake of the family that she should come back to
Mr. Bangles for further information at a subsequent period, he very
politely assured her that she would "do him proud," whenever she
might please to call in Hook Court. And then he saw her into Lombard
Street, and put her into an omnibus. She was therefore well qualified
to tell Johnny all the particulars of the tragedy,--and she did
so far overcome her horror as to tell them all. She told her tale
somewhat after the manner of Æneas, not forgetting the "quorum pars
magna fui." "I feel that it almost makes an old woman of me," said
she, when she had finished.

"No," said Johnny, remonstrating;--"not that."

"But it does. To have been concerned in so terrible a tragedy takes
more of life out of one than years of tranquil existence." As she
had told him nothing of her intercourse with Bangles,--with Bangles
who had literally picked the poor wretch up,--he did not see how
she herself had been concerned in the matter; but he said nothing
about that, knowing the character of his Madalina. "I shall
see--that--body, floating before my eyes while I live," she said,
"and the gory wound, and,--and--" "Don't," said Johnny, recoiling in
truth from the picture, by which he was revolted. "Never again," she
said; "never again! But you forced it from me, and now I shall not
close my eyes for a week."

She then became very comfortably confidential, and discussed
the affairs of poor Mrs. Dobbs Broughton with a great deal of
satisfaction. "I went to see her, of course, but she sent me down
word to say that the shock would be too much for her. I do not wonder
that she should not see me. Poor Maria! She came to me for advice,
you know, when Dobbs Broughton first proposed to her; and I was
obliged to tell her what I really thought. I knew her character so
well! 'Dear Maria,' I said, 'if you think that you can love him, take
him!' 'I think I can,' she replied. 'But,' said I, 'make yourself
quite sure about the business.' And how has it turned out? She
never loved him. What heart she has she has given to that wretched
Dalrymple."

"I don't see that he is particularly wretched," said Johnny, pleading
for his friend.

"He is wretched, and so you'll find. She gave him her heart after
giving her hand to poor Dobbs; and as for the business, there isn't
as much left as will pay for her mourning. I don't wonder that she
could not bring herself to see me."

"And what has become of the business?"

"It belongs to Mrs. Van Siever,--to her and Musselboro. Poor
Broughton had some little money, and it has gone among them.
Musselboro, who never had a penny, will be a rich man. Of course you
know that he is going to marry Clara?"

"Nonsense!"

"I always told you that it would be so. And now you may perhaps
acknowledge that Conway Dalrymple's prospects are not very brilliant.
I hope he likes being cut out by Mr. Musselboro! Of course he will
have to marry Maria. I do not see how he can escape. Indeed, she is
too good for him;--only after such a marriage as that, there would be
an end to all his prospects as an artist. The best thing for them
would be to go to New Zealand."

John Eames certainly liked these evenings with Miss Demolines. He sat
at his ease in a comfortable chair, and amused himself by watching
her different little plots. And then she had bright eyes, and she
flattered him, and allowed him to scold her occasionally. And now
and again there might be some more potent attraction, when she would
admit him to take her hand,--or the like. It was better than to sit
smoking with men at the club. But he could not sit all night even
with Madalina Demolines, and at eleven he got up to take his leave.
"When shall you see Miss Dale?" she asked him suddenly.

"I do not know," he answered, frowning at her. He always frowned at
her when she spoke to him of Miss Dale.

"I do not in the least care for your frowns," she said playfully,
putting up her hands to smooth his brows. "I think I know you
intimately enough to name your goddess to you."

"She isn't my goddess."

"A very cold goddess, I should think, from what I hear. I wish to ask
you for a promise respecting her."

"What promise?"

"Will you grant it me?"

"How can I tell till I hear?"

"You must promise me not to speak of me to her when you see her."

"But why must I promise that?"

"Promise me."

"Not unless you tell me why." Johnny had already assured himself that
nothing could be more improbable than that he should mention the name
of Miss Demolines to Lily Dale.

"Very well, sir. Then you may go. And I must say that unless you can
comply with so slight a request as that, I shall not care to see you
here again. Mr. Eames, why should you want to speak evil of me to
Miss Dale?"

"I do not want to speak evil of you."

"I know that you could not speak of me to her without at least
ridicule. Come, promise me. You shall come here on Thursday evening,
and I will tell you why I have asked you."

"Tell me now."

She hesitated a moment, and then shook her head. "No. I cannot tell
you now. My heart is still bleeding with the memory of that poor
man's fate. I will not tell you now. And yet it is now that you must
give me the promise. Will you not trust me so far as that?"

"I will not speak of you to Miss Dale."

"There is my own friend! And now, John, mind you are here at
half-past eight on Thursday. Punctually at half-past eight. There is
a thing I have to tell you, which I will tell you then if you will
come. I had thought to have told you to-day."

"And why not now?"

"I cannot. My feelings are too many for me. I should never go through
with it after all that has passed between us about poor Broughton.
I should break down; indeed I should. Go now, for I am tired." Then,
having probably taken a momentary advantage of that more potent
attraction to which we have before alluded, he left the room very
suddenly.

He left the room very suddenly because Madalina's movements had been
so sudden, and her words so full of impulse. He had become aware
that in this little game which he was playing in Porchester Terrace
everything ought to be done after some unaccustomed and special
fashion. So,--having clasped Madalina for one moment in his arms,--he
made a rush at the room door, and was out on the landing in a second.
He was a little too quick for old Lady Demolines, the skirt of whose
night-dress,--as it seemed to Johnny,--he saw whisking away, in at
another door. It was nothing, however, to him if old Lady Demolines,
who was always too ill to be seen, chose to roam about her own house
in her night-dress.

When he found himself alone in the street, his mind reverted to Dobbs
Broughton and the fate of the wretched man, and he sauntered slowly
down Palace Gardens, that he might look at the house in which he had
dined with a man who had destroyed himself by his own hands. He stood
for a moment looking up at the windows, in which there was now no
light, thinking of the poor woman whom he had seen in the midst of
luxury, and who was now left a widow in such miserable circumstances!
As for the suggestion that his friend Conway would marry her, he did
not believe it for a moment. He knew too well what the suggestions of
his Madalina were worth, and the motives from which they sprung. But
he thought it might be true that Mrs. Van Siever had absorbed all
there was of property, and possibly, also, that Musselboro was to
marry her daughter. At any rate, he would go to Dalrymple's rooms,
and if he could find him, would learn the truth. He knew enough of
Dalrymple's ways of life, and of the ways of his friend's chambers
and studio, to care nothing for the lateness of the hour, and in a
very few minutes he was sitting in Dalrymple's arm-chair. He found
Siph Dunn there, smoking in unperturbed tranquillity, and as long as
that lasted he could ask no questions about Mrs. Broughton. He told
them, therefore, of his adventures abroad, and of Crawley's escape.
But at last, having finished his third pipe, Siph Dunn took his
leave.

"Tell me," said John, as soon as Dunn had closed the door, "what is
this I hear about Dobbs Broughton?"

"He has blown his brains out. That is all."

"How terribly shocking!"

"Yes; it shocked us all at first. We are used to it now."

"And the business?"

"That had gone to the dogs. They say at least that his share of it
had done so."

"And he was ruined?"

"They say so. That is, Musselboro says so, and Mrs. Van Siever."

"And what do you say, Conway?"

"The less I say the better. I have my hopes,--only you're such a
talkative fellow, one can't trust you."

"I never told any secret of yours, old fellow."

"Well;--the fact is, I have an idea that something may be saved for
the poor woman. I think that they are wronging her. Of course all
I can do is to put the matter into a lawyer's hands, and pay the
lawyer's bill. So I went to your cousin, and he has taken the case
up. I hope he won't ruin me."

"Then I suppose you are quarrelling with Mrs. Van?"

"That doesn't matter. She has quarrelled with me."

"And what about Jael, Conway? They tell me that Jael is going to
become Mrs. Musselboro."

"Who has told you that?"

"A bird."

"Yes; I know who the bird is. I don't think that Jael will become
Mrs. Musselboro. I don't think that Jael would become Mrs.
Musselboro, if Jael were the only woman, and Musselboro the only
man in London. To tell you a little bit of secret, Johnny, I think
that Jael will become the wife of one Conway Dalrymple. That is my
opinion; and as far as I can judge, it is the opinion of Jael also."

"But not the opinion of Mrs. Van. The bird told me another thing,
Conway."

"What was the other thing?"

"The bird hinted that all this would end in your marrying the widow
of that poor wretch who destroyed himself."

"Johnny, my boy," said the artist, after a moment's silence, "if I
give you a bit of advice, will you profit by it?"

"I'll try, if it's not disagreeable."

"Whether you profit by it, or whether you do not, keep it to
yourself. I know the bird better than you do, and I strongly caution
you to beware of the bird. The bird is a bird of prey, and altogether
an unclean bird. The bird wants a mate and doesn't much care how she
finds one. And the bird wants money, and doesn't much care how she
gets it. The bird is a decidedly bad bird, and not at all fit to take
the place of domestic hen in a decent farmyard. In plain English,
Johnny, you'll find some day, if you go over too often to Porchester
Terrace, either that you are going to marry the bird, or else that
you are employing your cousin Toogood for your defence in an action
for breach of promise, brought against you by that venerable old
bird, the bird's mamma."

"If it's to be either, it will be the latter," said Johnny as he took
up his hat to go away.




