
JOHN EAMES BECOMES A MAN.


Eames, when he was half way up to London in the railway carriage,
took out from his pocket a letter and read it. During the former
portion of his journey he had been thinking of other things; but
gradually he had resolved that it would be better for him not to
think more of those other things for the present, and therefore he
had recourse to his letter by way of dissipating his thoughts. It was
from Cradell, and ran as follows:--


   Income-Tax Office, May --, 186--.

   MY DEAR JOHN,--I hope the tidings which I have to give
   you will not make you angry, and that you will not think
   I am untrue to the great friendship which I have for you
   because of that which I am now going to tell you. There
   is no _man_--[and the word man was underscored]--there is
   no _man_ whose regard I value so highly as I do yours;
   and though I feel that you can have no just ground to be
   displeased with me after all that I have heard you say on
   many occasions, nevertheless, in matters of the heart it
   is very hard for one person to understand the sentiments
   of another, and when the affections of a lady are
   concerned, I know that quarrels will sometimes arise.


Eames, when he had got so far as this, on the first perusal of the
letter, knew well what was to follow. "Poor Caudle!" he said to
himself; "he's hooked, and he'll never get himself off the hook
again."


   But let that be as it may, the matter has now gone too
   far for any alteration to be made by me; nor would any
   mere earthly inducement suffice to change me. The claims
   of friendship are very strong, _but those of love are
   paramount_. Of course I know all that has passed between
   you and Amelia Roper. Much of this I had heard from
   you before, but the rest she has now told me with that
   pure-minded honesty which is the most remarkable feature
   in her character. She has confessed that at one time she
   felt attached to you, and that she was induced by your
   perseverance to allow you to regard her as your fiancy.
   [Fancy-girl he probably conceived to be the vulgar English
   for the elegant term which he used.] But all that must
   be over between you now. _Amelia has promised to be
   mine_--[this also was underscored]--and mine I intend that
   she shall be. That you may find in the kind smiles of
   L. D. consolation for any disappointment which this may
   occasion you, is the ardent wish of your true friend,

   JOSEPH CRADELL.

   P.S.--Perhaps I had better tell you the whole. Mrs. Roper
   has been in some trouble about her house. She is a little
   in arrears with her rent, and some bills have not been
   paid. As she explained that she has been brought into this
   by those dreadful Lupexes I have consented to take the
   house into my own hands, and have given bills to one or
   two tradesmen for small amounts. Of course she will take
   them up, but it was the credit that was wanting. She
   will carry on the house, but I shall, in fact, be the
   proprietor. I suppose it will not suit you now to remain
   here, but don't you think I might make it comfortable
   enough for some of our fellows; say half-a-dozen, or so?
   That is Mrs. Roper's idea, and I certainly think it is not
   a bad one. Our first efforts must be to get rid of the
   Lupexes. Miss Spruce goes next week. In the meantime we
   are all taking our meals up in our own rooms, so that
   there is nothing for the Lupexes to eat. But they don't
   seem to mind that, and still keep the sitting-room and
   best bedroom. We mean to lock them out after Tuesday, and
   send all their boxes to the public-house.


Poor Cradell! Eames, as he threw himself back upon his seat and
contemplated the depth of misfortune into which his friend had
fallen, began to be almost in love with his own position. He himself
was, no doubt, a very miserable fellow. There was only one thing
in life worth living for, and that he could not get. He had been
thinking for the last three days of throwing himself before a
locomotive steam-engine, and was not quite sure that he would not
do it yet; but, nevertheless, his place was a place among the gods
as compared to that which poor Cradell had selected for himself.
To be not only the husband of Amelia Roper, but to have been driven
to take upon himself as his bride's fortune the whole of his
future mother-in-law's debts! To find himself the owner of a very
indifferent lodging-house;--the owner as regarded all responsibility,
though not the owner as regarded any possible profit! And then, above
and almost worse than all the rest, to find himself saddled with the
Lupexes in the beginning of his career! Poor Cradell indeed!

Eames had not taken his things away from the lodging-house before he
left London, and therefore determined to drive to Burton Crescent
immediately on his arrival, not with the intention of remaining
there, even for a night, but that he might bid them farewell, speak
his congratulations to Amelia, and arrange for his final settlement
with Mrs. Roper. It should have been explained in the last chapter
that the earl had told him before parting with him that his want of
success with Lily would make no difference as regarded money. John
had, of course, expostulated, saying that he did not want anything,
and would not, under his existing circumstances, accept anything; but
the earl was a man who knew how to have his own way, and in this
matter did have it. Our friend, therefore, was a man of wealth when
he returned to London, and could tell Mrs. Roper that he would send
her a cheque for her little balance as soon as he reached his office.

He arrived in the middle of the day,--not timing his return at all
after the usual manner of Government clerks, who generally manage to
reach the metropolis not more than half an hour before the moment
at which they are bound to show themselves in their seats. But he
had come back two days before he was due, and had run away from the
country as though London in May to him were much pleasanter than the
woods and fields. But neither had London nor the woods and fields any
influence on his return. He had gone down that he might throw himself
at the feet of Lily Dale,--gone down, as he now confessed to himself,
with hopes almost triumphant, and he had returned because Lily Dale
would not have him at her feet. "I loved him,--him, Crosbie,--better
than all the world besides. It is still the same. I still love him
better than all the world." Those were the words which had driven him
back to London; and having been sent away with such words as those,
it was little matter to him whether he reached his office a day or
two sooner or later. The little room in the city, even with the
accompaniment of Sir Raffle's bell and Sir Raffle's voice, would be
now more congenial to him than Lady Julia's drawing-room. He would
therefore present himself to Sir Raffle on that very afternoon, and
expel some interloper from his seat. But he would first call in
Burton Crescent and say farewell to the Ropers.

The door was opened for him by the faithful Jemima. "Mr. Heames, Mr.
Heames! ho dear, ho dear!" and the poor girl, who had always taken
his side in the adventures of the lodging-house, raised her hands on
high and lamented the fate which had separated her favourite from its
fortunes. "I suppose you knows it all, Mister Johnny?" Mister Johnny
said that he believed he did know it all, and asked for the mistress
of the house. "Yes, sure enough, she's at home. She don't dare stir
out much, 'cause of them Lupexes. Ain't this a pretty game? No dinner
and no nothink! Them boxes is Miss Spruce's. She's agoing now, this
minute. You'll find 'em all upstairs in the drawen-room." So upstairs
into the drawing-room he went, and there he found the mother and
daughter, and with them Miss Spruce, tightly packed up in her bonnet
and shawl. "Don't, mother," Amelia was saying; "what's the good of
going on in that way? If she chooses to go, let her go."

"But she's been with me now so many years," said Mrs. Roper, sobbing;
"and I've always done everything for her! Haven't I, now, Sally
Spruce?" It struck Eames immediately that, though he had been an
inmate in the house for two years, he had never before heard that
maiden lady's Christian name. Miss Spruce was the first to see Eames
as he entered the room. It is probable that Mrs. Roper's pathos might
have produced some answering pathos on her part had she remained
unobserved, but the sight of a young man brought her back to her
usual state of quiescence. "I'm only an old woman," said she; "and
here's Mr. Eames come back again."

"How d'ye do, Mrs. Roper? how d'ye do,--Amelia? how d'ye do, Miss
Spruce?" and he shook hands with them all.

"Oh, laws," said Mrs. Roper, "you have given me such a start!"

"Dear me, Mr. Eames; only think of your coming back in that way,"
said Amelia.

"Well, what way should I come back? You didn't hear me knock at the
door, that's all. So Miss Spruce is really going to leave you?"

"Isn't it dreadful, Mr. Eames? Nineteen years we've been
together;--taking both houses together, Miss Spruce, we have,
indeed." Miss Spruce, at this point, struggled very hard to convince
John Eames that the period in question had in truth extended over
only eighteen years, but Mrs. Roper was authoritative, and would not
permit it. "It's nineteen years if it's a day. No one ought to know
dates if I don't, and there isn't one in the world understands her
ways unless it's me. Haven't I been up to your bedroom every night,
and with my own hand given you--" But she stopped herself, and was
too good a woman to declare before a young man what had been the
nature of her nightly ministrations to her guest.

"I don't think you'll be so comfortable anywhere else, Miss Spruce,"
said Eames.

"Comfortable! of course she won't," said Amelia. "But if I was mother
I wouldn't have any more words about it."

"It isn't the money I'm thinking of, but the feeling of it," said
Mrs. Roper. "The house will be so lonely like. I shan't know myself;
that I shan't. And now that things are all settled so pleasantly, and
that the Lupexes must go on Tuesday-- I'll tell you what, Sally; I'll
pay for the cab myself, and I'll start off to Dulwich by the omnibus
to-morrow, and settle it all out of my own pocket. I will indeed.
Come; there's the cab. Let me go down, and send him away."

"I'll do that," said Eames. "It's only sixpence, off the stand,"
Mrs. Roper called to him as he left the room. But the cabman got
a shilling, and John, as he returned, found Jemima in the act of
carrying Miss Spruce's boxes back to her room. "So much the better
for poor Caudle," said he to himself. "As he has gone into the trade
it's well that he should have somebody that will pay him."

Mrs. Roper followed Miss Spruce up the stairs and Johnny was left
with Amelia. "He's written to you, I know," said she, with her face
turned a little away from him. She was certainly very handsome, but
there was a hard, cross, almost sullen look about her, which robbed
her countenance of all its pleasantness. And yet she had no intention
of being sullen with him.

"Yes," said John. "He has told me how it's all going to be."

"Well?" she said.

"Well?" said he.

"Is that all you've got to say?"

"I'll congratulate you, if you'll let me."

"Psha;--congratulations! I hate such humbug. If you've no feelings
about it, I'm sure that I've none. Indeed I don't know what's the
good of feelings. They never did me any good. Are you engaged to
marry L. D.?"

"No, I am not."

"And you've nothing else to say to me?"

"Nothing,--except my hopes for your happiness. What else can I say?
You are engaged to marry my friend Cradell, and I think it will be a
happy match."

She turned away her face further from him, and the look of it became
even more sullen. Could it be possible that at such a moment she
still had a hope that he might come back to her?

"Good-by, Amelia," he said, putting out his hand to her.

"And this is to be the last of you in this house!"

"Well, I don't know about that. I'll come and call upon you, if
you'll let me, when you're married."

"Yes," she said, "that there may be rows in the house, and noise, and
jealousy,--as there have been with that wicked woman upstairs. Not
if I know it, you won't! John Eames, I wish I'd never seen you. I
wish we might have both fallen dead when we first met. I didn't think
ever to have cared for a man as I have cared for you. It's all trash
and nonsense and foolery; I know that. It's all very well for young
ladies as can sit in drawing-rooms all their lives, but when a woman
has her way to make in the world it's all foolery. And such a hard
way too to make as mine is!"

"But it won't be hard now."

"Won't it? But I think it will. I wish you would try it. Not that I'm
going to complain. I never minded work, and as for company, I can put
up with anybody. The world's not to be all dancing and fiddling for
the likes of me. I know that well enough. But--" and then she paused.

"What's the 'but' about, Amelia?"

"It's like you to ask me; isn't it?" To tell the truth he should not
have asked her. "Never mind. I'm not going to have any words with
you. If you've been a knave I've been a fool, and that's worse."

"But I don't think I have been a knave."

"I've been both," said the girl; "and both for nothing. After that
you may go. I've told you what I am, and I'll leave you to name
yourself. I didn't think it was in me to have been such a fool. It's
that that frets me. Never mind, sir; it's all over now, and I wish
you good-by."

I do not think that there was the slightest reason why John should
have again kissed her at parting, but he did so. She bore it, not
struggling with him; but she took his caress with sullen endurance.
"It'll be the last," she said. "Good-by, John Eames."

"Good-by, Amelia. Try to make him a good wife and then you'll
be happy." She turned up her nose at this, assuming a look of
unutterable scorn. But she said nothing further, and then he left
the room. At the parlour door he met Mrs. Roper, and had his parting
words with her.

"I am so glad you came," said she. "It was just that word you said
that made Miss Spruce stay. Her money is so ready, you know! And
so you've had it all out with her about Cradell. She'll make him a
good wife, she will indeed;--much better than you've been giving her
credit for."

"I don't doubt she'll be a very good wife."

"You see, Mr. Eames, it's all over now, and we understand each other;
don't we? It made me very unhappy when she was setting her cap at
you; it did indeed. She is my own daughter, and I couldn't go against
her;--could I? But I knew it wasn't in any way suiting. Laws, I know
the difference. She's good enough for him any day of the week, Mr.
Eames."

"That she is,--Saturdays or Sundays," said Johnny, not knowing
exactly what he ought to say.

"So she is; and if he does his duty by her she won't go astray in
hers by him. And as for you, Mr. Eames, I am sure I've always felt it
an honour and a pleasure to have you in the house; and if ever you
could use a good word in sending to me any of your young men, I'd do
by them as a mother should; I would indeed. I know I've been to blame
about those Lupexes, but haven't I suffered for it, Mr. Eames? And it
was difficult to know at first; wasn't it? And as to you and Amelia,
if you would send any of your young men to try, there couldn't be
anything more of that kind, could there? I know it hasn't all been
just as it should have been;--that is as regards you; but I should
like to hear you say that you've found me honest before you went. I
have tried to be honest, I have indeed."

Eames assured her that he was convinced of her honesty, and that
he had never thought of impugning her character either in regard
to those unfortunate people, the Lupexes, or in reference to other
matters. "He did not think," he said, "that any young men would
consult him as to their lodgings; but if he could be of any service
to her, he would." Then he bade her good-by, and having bestowed
half-a-sovereign on the faithful Jemima, he took a long farewell of
Burton Crescent. Amelia had told him not to come and see her when she
should be married, and he had resolved that he would take her at her
word. So he walked off from the Crescent, not exactly shaking the
dust from his feet, but resolving that he would know no more either
of its dust or of its dirt. Dirt enough he had encountered there
certainly, and he was now old enough to feel that the inmates of Mrs.
Roper's house had not been those among whom a resting-place for his
early years should judiciously have been sought. But he had come out
of the fire comparatively unharmed, and I regret to say that he felt
but little for the terrible scorchings to which his friend had been
subjected and was about to subject himself. He was quite content to
look at the matter exactly as it was looked at by Mrs. Roper. Amelia
was good enough for Joseph Cradell--any day of the week. Poor
Cradell, of whom in these pages after this notice no more will be
heard! I cannot but think that a hard measure of justice was meted
out to him, in proportion to the extent of his sins. More weak and
foolish than our friend and hero he had been, but not to my knowledge
more wicked. But it is to the vain and foolish that the punishments
fall;--and to them they fall so thickly and constantly that the
thinker is driven to think that vanity and folly are of all sins
those which may be the least forgiven. As for Cradell I may declare
that he did marry Amelia, that he did, with some pride, take the
place of master of the house at the bottom of Mrs. Roper's table, and
that he did make himself responsible for all Mrs. Roper's debts. Of
his future fortunes there is not space to speak in these pages.

Going away from the Crescent Eames had himself driven to his office,
which he reached just as the men were leaving it, at four o'clock.
Cradell was gone, so that he did not see him on that afternoon; but
he had an opportunity of shaking hands with Mr. Love, who treated
him with all the smiling courtesy due to an official bigwig,--for
a private secretary, if not absolutely a big-wig, is semi-big, and
entitled to a certain amount of reverence;--and he passed Mr. Kissing
in the passage, hurrying along as usual with a huge book under
his arm. Mr. Kissing, hurried as he was, stopped his shuffling
feet; but Eames only looked at him, hardly honouring him with the
acknowledgment of a nod of his head. Mr. Kissing, however, was
not offended; he knew that the private secretary of the First
Commissioner had been the guest of an earl; and what more than a nod
could be expected from him? After that John made his way into the
august presence of Sir Raffle, and found that great man putting on
his shoes in the presence of FitzHoward. FitzHoward blushed; but the
shoes had not been touched by him, as he took occasion afterwards to
inform John Eames.

Sir Raffle was all smiles and civility. "Delighted to see you
back, Eames: am, upon my word; though I and FitzHoward have got on
capitally in your absence; haven't we, FitzHoward?"

"Oh, yes," drawled FitzHoward. "I haven't minded it for a time, just
while Eames has been away."

"You're much too idle to keep at it, I know; but your bread will be
buttered for you elsewhere, so it doesn't signify. My compliments to
the duchess when you see her." Then FitzHoward went. "And how's my
dear old friend?" asked Sir Raffle, as though of all men living Lord
De Guest were the one for whom he had the strongest and the oldest
love. And yet he must have known that John Eames knew as much about
it as he did himself. But there are men who have the most lively
gratification in calling lords and marquises their friends, though
they know that nobody believes a word of what they say,--even though
they know how great is the odium they incur, and how lasting is the
ridicule which their vanity produces. It is a gentle insanity which
prevails in the outer courts of every aristocracy; and as it brings
with itself considerable annoyance and but a lukewarm pleasure, it
should not be treated with too keen a severity.

"And how's my dear old friend?" Eames assured him that his dear old
friend was all right, that Lady Julia was all right, that the dear
old place was all right. Sir Raffle now spoke as though the "dear
old place" were quite well known to him. "Was the game doing pretty
well? Was there a promise of birds?" Sir Raffle's anxiety was
quite intense, and expressed with almost familiar affection. "And,
by-the-by, Eames, where are you living at present?"

"Well, I'm not settled. I'm at the Great Western Railway Hotel at
this moment."

"Capital house, very; only it's expensive if you stay there the whole
season." Johnny had no idea of remaining there beyond one night, but
he said nothing as to this. "By-the-by, you might as well come and
dine with us to-morrow. Lady Buffle is most anxious to know you.
There'll be one or two with us. I did ask my friend Dumbello, but
there's some nonsense going on in the House, and he thinks that he
can't get away." Johnny was more gracious than Lord Dumbello, and
accepted the invitation. "I wonder what Lady Buffle will be like?" he
said to himself, as he walked away from the office.

He had turned into the Great Western Hotel, not as yet knowing where
to look for a home; and there we will leave him, eating his solitary
mutton-chop at one of those tables which are so comfortable to the
eye, but which are so comfortless in reality. I speak not now with
reference to the excellent establishment which has been named, but
to the nature of such tables in general. A solitary mutton-chop in
an hotel coffee-room is not a banquet to be envied by any god; and
if the mutton-chop be converted into soup, fish, little dishes,
big dishes, and the rest, the matter becomes worse and not better.
What comfort are you to have, seated alone on that horsehair chair,
staring into the room and watching the waiters as they whisk about
their towels? No one but an Englishman has ever yet thought of
subjecting himself to such a position as that! But here we will leave
John Eames, and in doing so I must be allowed to declare that only
now, at this moment, has he entered on his manhood. Hitherto he
has been a hobbledehoy,--a calf, as it were, who had carried his
calfishness later into life than is common with calves; but who did
not, perhaps, on that account, give promise of making a worse ox than
the rest of them. His life hitherto, as recorded in these pages, had
afforded him no brilliant success, had hardly qualified him for the
role of hero which he has been made to play. I feel that I have been
in fault in giving such prominence to a hobbledehoy, and that I
should have told my story better had I brought Mr. Crosbie more
conspicuously forward on my canvas. He at any rate has gotten to
himself a wife--as a hero always should do; whereas I must leave my
poor friend Johnny without any matrimonial prospects.

It was thus that he thought of himself as he sat moping over his
solitary table in the hotel coffee-room. He acknowledged to himself
that he had not hitherto been a man; but at the same time he made
some resolution which, I trust, may assist him in commencing his
manhood from this date.




