
JOHN EAMES ENCOUNTERS TWO ADVENTURES, AND DISPLAYS GREAT COURAGE IN
BOTH.


Lily thought that her lover's letter was all that it should be.
She was not quite aware what might be the course of post between
Courcy and Allington, and had not, therefore, felt very grievously
disappointed when the letter did not come on the very first day.
She had, however, in the course of the morning, walked down to
the post-office, in order that she might be sure that it was not
remaining there.

"Why, miss, they be all delivered; you know that," said Mrs. Crump,
the post-mistress.

"But one might be left behind, I thought."

"John Postman went up to the house this very day, with a newspaper
for your mamma. I can't make letters for people if folks don't write
them.".

"But they are left behind sometimes, Mrs. Crump. He wouldn't come up
with one letter if he'd got nothing else for anybody in the street."

"Indeed but he would then. I wouldn't let him leave a letter here
no how, nor yet a paper. It's no good you're coming down here for
letters, Miss Lily. If he don't write to you, I can't make him do
it." And so poor Lily went home discomforted.

But the letter came on the next morning, and all was right. According
to her judgment it lacked nothing, either in fulness or in affection.
When he told her how he had planned his early departure in order that
he might avoid the pain of parting with her on the last moment, she
smiled and pressed the paper, and rejoiced inwardly that she had
got the better of him as to that manoeuvre. And then she kissed the
words which told her that he had been glad to have her with him
at the last moment. When he declared that he had been happier at
Allington than he was at Courcy, she believed him thoroughly, and
rejoiced that it should be so. And when he accused himself of being
worldly, she excused him, persuading herself that he was nearly
perfect in this respect as in others. Of course a man living in
London, and having to earn his bread out in the world, must be more
worldly than a country girl; but the fact of his being able to love
such a girl, to choose such a one for his wife,--was not that alone
sufficient proof that the world had not enslaved him? "My heart is on
the Allington lawns," he said; and then, as she read the words, she
kissed the paper again.

In her eyes, and to her ears, and to her heart, the letter was a
beautiful letter. I believe there is no bliss greater than that which
a thorough love-letter gives to a girl who knows that in receiving it
she commits no fault,--who can open it before her father and mother
with nothing more than the slight blush which the consciousness of
her position gives her. And of all love-letters the first must be the
sweetest! What a value there is in every word! How each expression is
scanned and turned to the best account! With what importance are all
those little phrases invested, which too soon become mere phrases,
used as a matter of course. Crosbie had finished his letter by
bidding God bless her; "And you too," said Lily, pressing the letter
to her bosom.

"Does he say anything particular?" asked Mrs. Dale.

"Yes, mamma; it's all very particular."

"But there's nothing for the public ear."

"He sends his love to you and Bell."

"We are very much obliged to him."

"So you ought to be. And he says that he went to church going through
Barchester, and that the clergyman was the grandfather of that Lady
Dumbello. When he got to Courcy Castle Lady Dumbello was there."

"What a singular coincidence!" said Mrs. Dale.

"I won't tell you a word more about his letter," said Lily. So she
folded it up, and put it in her pocket. But as soon as she found
herself alone in her own room, she had it out again, and read it over
some half-a-dozen times.

That was the occupation of her morning;--that, and the manufacture
of some very intricate piece of work which was intended for the
adornment of Mr. Crosbie's person. Her hands, however, were very full
of work;--or, rather, she intended that they should be full. She
would take with her to her new home, when she was married, all manner
of household gear, the produce of her own industry and economy. She
had declared that she wanted to do something for her future husband,
and she would begin that something at once. And in this matter she
did not belie her promises to herself, or allow her good intentions
to evaporate unaccomplished. She soon surrounded herself with harder
tasks than those embroidered slippers with which she indulged herself
immediately after his departure. And Mrs. Dale and Bell,--though in
their gentle way they laughed at her,--nevertheless they worked with
her, sitting sternly to their long tasks, in order that Crosbie's
house might not be empty when their darling should go to take her
place there as his wife.

But it was absolutely necessary that the letter should be answered.
It would in her eyes have been a great sin to have let that day's
post go without carrying a letter from her to Courcy Castle,--a sin
of which she felt no temptation to be guilty. It was an exquisite
pleasure to her to seat herself at her little table, with her neat
desk and small appurtenances for epistle-craft, and to feel that she
had a letter to write in which she had truly much to say. Hitherto
her correspondence had been uninteresting and almost weak in its
nature. From her mother and sister she had hardly yet been parted;
and though she had other friends, she had seldom found herself with
very much to tell them by post. What could she communicate to Mary
Eames at Guestwick, which should be in itself exciting as she wrote
it? When she wrote to John Eames, and told "Dear John" that mamma
hoped to have the pleasure of seeing him to tea at such an hour, the
work of writing was of little moment to her, though the note when
written became one of the choicest treasures of him to whom it was
addressed.

But now the matter was very different. When she saw the words
"Dearest Adolphus" on the paper before her, she was startled with
their significance. "And four months ago I had never even heard of
him," she said to herself, almost with awe. And now he was more to
her, and nearer to her, than even was her sister or her mother! She
recollected how she had laughed at him behind his back, and called
him a swell on the first day of his coming to the Small House, and
how, also, she had striven, in her innocent way, to look her best
when called upon to go out and walk with the stranger from London.
He was no longer a stranger now, but her own dearest friend.

She had put down her pen that she might think of all this--by no
means for the first time--and then resumed it with a sudden start
as though fearing that the postman might be in the village before
her letter was finished. "Dearest Adolphus, I need not tell you how
delighted I was when your letter was brought to me this morning."
But I will not repeat the whole of her letter here. She had no
incident to relate, none even so interesting as that of Mr. Crosbie's
encounter with Mr. Harding at Barchester. She had met no Lady
Dumbello, and had no counterpart to Lady Alexandrina, of whom, as
a friend, she could say a word in praise. John Eames's name she did
not mention, knowing that John Eames was not a favourite with Mr.
Crosbie; nor had she anything to say of John Eames, that had not been
already said. He had, indeed, promised to come over to Allington;
but this visit had not been made when Lily wrote her first letter to
Crosbie. It was a sweet, good, honest love-letter, full of assurances
of unalterable affection and unlimited confidence, indulging in a
little quiet fun as to the grandees of Courcy Castle, and ending with
a promise that she would be happy and contented if she might receive
his letters constantly, and live with the hope of seeing him at
Christmas.

"I am in time, Mrs. Crump, am I not?" she said, as she walked into
the post-office.

"Of course you be,--for the next half-hour. T' postman--he bain't
stirred from t' ale'us yet. Just put it into t' box, wull ye?"

"But you won't leave it there?"

"Leave it there! Did you ever hear the like of that? If you're
afeared to put it in, you can take it away; that's all about it,
Miss Lily." And then Mrs. Crump turned away to her avocations at the
washing-tub. Mrs. Crump had a bad temper, but perhaps she had some
excuse. A separate call was made upon her time with reference to
almost every letter brought to her office, and for all this, as she
often told her friends in profound disgust, she received as salary no
more than "tuppence farden a day. It don't find me in shoe-leather;
no more it don't." As Mrs. Crump was never seen out of her own house,
unless it was in church once a month, this latter assertion about her
shoe-leather, could hardly have been true.

Lily had received another letter, and had answered it before Eames
made his promised visit to Allington. He, as will be remembered, had
also had a correspondence. He had answered Miss Roper's letter, and
had since that been living in fear of two things; in a lesser fear of
some terrible rejoinder from Amelia, and in a greater fear of a more
terrible visit from his lady-love. Were she to swoop down in very
truth upon his Guestwick home, and declare herself to his mother and
sister as his affianced bride, what mode of escape would then be left
for him? But this she had not yet done, nor had she even answered his
cruel missive.

"What an ass I am to be afraid of her!" he said to himself as he
walked along under the elms of Guestwick manor, which overspread the
road to Allington. When he first went over to Allington after his
return home, he had mounted himself on horseback, and had gone forth
brilliant with spurs, and trusting somewhat to the glories of his
dress and gloves. But he had then known nothing of Lily's engagement.
Now he was contented to walk; and as he had taken up his slouched
hat and stick in the passage of his mother's house, he had been very
indifferent as to his appearance. He walked quickly along the road,
taking for the first three miles the shade of the Guestwick elms, and
keeping his feet on the broad greensward which skirts the outside of
the earl's palings. "What an ass I am to be afraid of her!" And as he
swung his big stick in his hand, striking a tree here and there, and
knocking the stones from his path, he began to question himself in
earnest, and to be ashamed of his position in the world. "Nothing on
earth shall make me marry her," he said; "not if they bring a dozen
actions against me. She knows as well as I do, that I have never
intended to marry her. It's a cheat from beginning to end. If she
comes down here, I'll tell her so before my mother." But as the
vision of her sudden arrival came before his eyes, he acknowledged to
himself that he still held her in great fear. He had told her that he
loved her. He had written as much as that. If taxed with so much, he
must confess his sin.

Then, by degrees, his mind turned away from Amelia Roper to Lily
Dale, not giving him a prospect much more replete with enjoyment than
that other one. He had said that he would call at Allington before he
returned to town, and he was now redeeming his promise. But he did
not know why he should go there. He felt that he should sit silent
and abashed in Mrs. Dale's drawing-room, confessing by his demeanour
that secret which it behoved him now to hide from every one. He could
not talk easily before Lily, nor could he speak to her of the only
subject which would occupy his thoughts when in her presence. If
indeed, he might find her alone-- But, perhaps that might be worse
for him than any other condition.

When he was shown into the drawing-room there was nobody there. "They
were here a minute ago, all three," said the servant girl. "If you'll
walk down the garden, Mr. John, you'll be sure to find some of 'em."
So John Eames, with a little hesitation, walked down the garden.

First of all he went the whole way round the walks, meeting nobody.
Then he crossed the lawn, returning again to the farther end; and
there, emerging from the little path which led from the Great House,
he encountered Lily alone. "Oh, John," she said, "how d'ye do? I'm
afraid you did not find anybody in the house. Mamma and Bell are with
Hopkins, away in the large kitchen-garden."

"I've just come over," said Eames, "because I promised. I said I'd
come before I went back to London."

"And they'll be very glad to see you, and so am I. Shall we go after
them into the other grounds? But perhaps you walked over and are
tired."

"I did walk," said Eames; "not that I am very tired." But in truth
he did not wish to go after Mrs. Dale, though he was altogether at
a loss as to what he would say to Lily while remaining with her. He
had fancied that he would like to have some opportunity of speaking
to her alone before he went away;--of making some special use of the
last interview which he should have with her before she became a
married woman. But now the opportunity was there, and he hardly dared
to avail himself of it.

"You'll stay and dine with us," said Lily.

"No, I'll not do that, for I especially told my mother that I would
be back."

"I'm sure it was very good of you to walk so far to see us. If you
really are not tired, I think we will go to mamma, as she would be
very sorry to miss you."

This she said, remembering at the moment what had been Crosbie's
injunctions to her about John Eames. But John had resolved that
he would say those words which he had come to speak, and that, as
Lily was there with him, he would avail himself of the chance which
fortune had given him.

"I don't think I'll go into the squire's garden," he said.

"Uncle Christopher is not there. He is about the farm somewhere."

"If you don't mind, Lily, I think I'll stay here. I suppose they'll
be back soon. Of course I should like to see them before I go away to
London. But, Lily, I came over now chiefly to see you. It was you who
asked me to promise."

Had Crosbie been right in those remarks of his? Had she been
imprudent in her little endeavour to be cordially kind to her old
friend? "Shall we go into the drawing-room?" she said, feeling that
she would be in some degree safer there than out among the shrubs and
paths of the garden. And I think she was right in this. A man will
talk of love out among the lilacs and roses, who would be stricken
dumb by the demure propriety of the four walls of a drawing-room.
John Eames also had some feeling of this kind, for he determined to
remain out in the garden, if he could so manage it.

"I don't want to go in unless you wish it," he said. "Indeed, I'd
rather stay here. So, Lily, you're going to be married?" And thus he
rushed at once into the middle of his discourse.

"Yes," said she, "I believe I am."

"I have not told you yet that I congratulated you."

"I have known very well that you did so in your heart. I have always
been sure that you wished me well."

"Indeed I have. And if congratulating a person is hoping that she
may always be happy, I do congratulate you. But, Lily--" And then he
paused, abashed by the beauty, purity, and woman's grace which had
forced him to love her.

"I think I understand all that you would say. I do not want ordinary
words to tell me that I am to count you among my best friends."

"No, Lily; you don't understand all that I would say. You have never
known how often and how much I have thought of you; how dearly I have
loved you."

"John, you must not talk of that now."

"I cannot go without telling you. When I came over here, and Mrs.
Dale told me that you were to be married to that man--"

"You must not speak of Mr. Crosbie in that way," she said, turning
upon him almost fiercely.

"I did not mean to say anything disrespectful of him to you. I should
hate myself if I were to do so. Of course you like him better than
anybody else?"

"I love him better than all the world besides."

"And so do I love you better than all the world besides." And as he
spoke he got up from his seat and stood before her. "I know how poor
I am, and unworthy of you; and only that you are engaged to him,
I don't suppose that I should now tell you. Of course you couldn't
accept such a one as me. But I have loved you ever since you
remember; and now that you are going to be his wife, I cannot but
tell you that it is so. You will go and live in London; but as to my
seeing you there, it will be impossible. I could not go into that
man's house."

"Oh, John."

"No, never; not if you become his wife. I have loved you as well
as he does. When Mrs. Dale told me of it, I thought I should have
fallen. I went away without seeing you because I was unable to speak
to you. I made a fool of myself, and have been a fool all along. I am
foolish now to tell you this, but I cannot help it."

"You will forget it all when you meet some girl that you can really
love."

"And have I not really loved you? Well, never mind. I have said what
I came to say, and I will now go. If it ever happens that we are down
in the country together, perhaps I may see you again; but never in
London. Good-by, Lily." And he put out his hand to her.


[ILLUSTRATION: "And have I not really loved you?"]


"And won't you stay for mamma?" she said.

"No. Give her my love, and to Bell. They understand all about it.
They will know why I have gone. If ever you should want anybody to do
anything for you, remember that I will do it, whatever it is." And
as he paced away from her across the lawn, the special deed in her
favour to which his mind was turned,--that one thing which he most
longed to do on her behalf,--was an act of corporal chastisement upon
Crosbie. If Crosbie would but ill-treat her,--ill-treat her with
some antenuptial barbarity,--and if only he could be called in to
avenge her wrongs! And as he made his way back along the road towards
Guestwick, he built up within his own bosom a castle in the air,
for her part in which Lily Dale would by no means have thanked him.

Lily when she was left alone burst into tears. She had certainly
said very little to encourage her forlorn suitor, and had so borne
herself during the interview that even Crosbie could hardly have
been dissatisfied; but now that Eames was gone her heart became very
tender towards him. She felt that she did love him also;--not at
all as she loved Crosbie, but still with a love that was tender,
soft, and true. If Crosbie could have known all her thoughts at that
moment, I doubt whether he would have liked them. She burst into
tears, and then hurried away into some nook where she could not be
seen by her mother and Bell on their return.

Eames went on his way, walking very quietly, swinging his stick and
kicking through the dust, with his heart full of the scene which had
just passed. He was angry with himself, thinking that he had played
his part badly, accusing himself in that he had been rough to her,
and selfish in the expression of his love; and he was angry with her
because she had declared to him that she loved Crosbie better than
all the world besides. He knew that of course she must do so;--that
at any rate it was to be expected that such was the case. Yet, he
thought, she might have refrained from saying so to him. "She chooses
to scorn me now," he said to himself; "but the time may come when she
will wish that she had scorned him." That Crosbie was wicked, bad,
and selfish, he believed most fully. He felt sure that the man would
ill-use her and make her wretched. He had some slight doubt whether
he would marry her, and from this doubt he endeavoured to draw a
scrap of comfort. If Crosbie would desert her, and if to him might
be accorded the privilege of beating the man to death with his fists
because of this desertion, then the world would not be quite blank
for him. In all this he was no doubt very cruel to Lily;--but then
had not Lily been very cruel to him?

He was still thinking of these things when he came to the first of
the Guestwick pastures. The boundary of the earl's property was very
plainly marked, for with it commenced also the shady elms along the
roadside, and the broad green margin of turf, grateful equally to
those who walked and to those who rode. Eames had got himself on to
the grass, but, in the fulness of his thoughts, was unconscious of
the change in his path, when he was startled by a voice in the next
field and the loud bellowing of a bull. Lord De Guest's choice cattle
he knew were there, and there was one special bull which was esteemed
by his lordship as of great value, and regarded as a high favourite.
The people about the place declared that the beast was vicious, but
Lord De Guest had often been heard to boast that it was never vicious
with him. "The boys tease him, and the men are almost worse than the
boys," said the earl; "but he'll never hurt any one that has not hurt
him." Guided by faith in his own teaching the earl had taught himself
to look upon his bull as a large, horned, innocent lamb of the flock.

As Eames paused on the road, he fancied that he recognized the earl's
voice, and it was the voice of one in distress. Then the bull's roar
sounded very plain in his ear, and almost close; upon hearing which
he rushed on to the gate, and, without much thinking what he was
doing, vaulted over it, and advanced a few steps into the field.

"Halloo!" shouted the earl. "There's a man. Come on." And then his
continued shoutings hardly formed themselves into intelligible words;
but Eames plainly understood that he was invoking assistance under
great pressure and stress of circumstances. The bull was making short
runs at his owner, as though determined in each run to have a toss
at his lordship; and at each run the earl would retreat quickly
for a few paces, but he retreated always facing his enemy, and as
the animal got near to him, would make digs at his face with the
long spud which he carried in his hand. But in thus making good his
retreat he had been unable to keep in a direct line to the gate,
and there seemed to be great danger lest the bull should succeed in
pressing him up against the hedge. "Come on!" shouted the earl, who
was fighting his battle manfully, but was by no means anxious to
carry off all the laurels of the victory himself. "Come on, I say!"
Then he stopped in his path, shouted into the bull's face, brandished
his spud, and threw about his arms, thinking that he might best
dismay the beast by the display of these warlike gestures.

Johnny Eames ran on gallantly to the peer's assistance, as he would
have run to that of any peasant in the land. He was one to whom I
should be perhaps wrong to attribute at this period of his life the
gift of very high courage. He feared many things which no man should
fear; but he did not fear personal mishap or injury to his own skin
and bones. When Cradell escaped out of the house in Burton Crescent,
making his way through the passage into the outer air, he did so
because he feared that Lupex would beat him or kick him, or otherwise
ill-use him. John Eames would also have desired to escape under
similar circumstances; but he would have so desired because he could
not endure to be looked upon in his difficulties by the people of the
house, and because his imagination would have painted the horrors
of a policeman dragging him off with a black eye and a torn coat.
There was no one to see him now, and no policeman to take offence.
Therefore he rushed to the earl's assistance, brandishing his stick,
and roaring in emulation of the bull.

When the animal saw with what unfairness he was treated, and that
the number of his foes was doubled, while no assistance had lent
itself on his side, he stood for a while, disgusted by the injustice
of humanity. He stopped, and throwing his head up to the heavens,
bellowed out his complaint. "Don't come close!" said the earl, who
was almost out of breath. "Keep a little apart. Ugh! ugh! whoop,
whoop!" And he threw up his arms manfully, jobbing about with his
spud, ever and anon rubbing the perspiration from off his eyebrows
with the back of his hand.

As the bull stood pausing, meditating whether under such
circumstances flight would not be preferable to gratified passion,
Eames made a rush in at him, attempting to hit him on the head. The
earl, seeing this, advanced a step also, and got his spud almost up
to the animal's eye. But these indignities the beast could not stand.
He made a charge, bending his head first towards John Eames, and
then, with that weak vacillation which is as disgraceful in a bull
as in a general, he changed his purpose, and turned his horns upon
his other enemy. The consequence was that his steps carried him in
between the two, and that the earl and Eames found themselves for a
while behind his tail.

"Now for the gate," said the earl.

"Slowly does it; slowly does it; don't run!" said Johnny, assuming in
the heat of the moment a tone of counsel which would have been very
foreign to him under other circumstances.

The earl was not a whit offended. "All right," said he, taking with
a backward motion the direction of the gate. Then as the bull again
faced towards him, he jumped from the ground, labouring painfully
with arms and legs, and ever keeping his spud well advanced against
the foe. Eames, holding his position a little apart from his friend,
stooped low and beat the ground with his stick, and as though defying
the creature. The bull felt himself defied, stood still and roared,
and then made another vacillating attack.

"Hold on till we reach the gate," said Eames.

"Ugh! ugh! Whoop! whoop!" shouted the earl. And so gradually they
made good their ground.

"Now get over," said Eames, when they had both reached the corner of
the field in which the gate stood.

"And what'll you do?" said the earl.

"I'll go at the hedge to the right." And Johnny as he spoke dashed
his stick about, so as to monopolize, for a moment, the attention of
the brute. The earl made a spring at the gate, and got well on to the
upper rung. The bull seeing that his prey was going, made a final
rush upon the earl and struck the timber furiously with his head,
knocking his lordship down on the other side. Lord De Guest was
already over, but not off the rail; and thus, though he fell, he
fell in safety on the sward beyond the gate. He fell in safety, but
utterly exhausted. Eames, as he had purposed, made a leap almost
sideways at a thick hedge which divided the field from one of the
Guestwick copses. There was a fairly broad ditch, and on the other
side a quickset hedge, which had, however, been weakened and injured
by trespassers at this corner, close to the gate. Eames was young and
active and jumped well. He jumped so well that he carried his body
full into the middle of the quickset, and then scrambled through to
the other side, not without much injury to his clothes, and some
damage also to his hands and face.

The beast, recovering from his shock against the wooden bars, looked
wistfully at his last retreating enemy, as he still struggled amidst
the bushes. He looked at the ditch and at the broken hedge, but he
did not understand how weak were the impediments in his way. He had
knocked his head against the stout timber, which was strong enough
to oppose him, but was dismayed by the brambles which he might have
trodden under foot without an effort. How many of us are like the
bull, turning away conquered by opposition which should be as nothing
to us, and breaking our feet, and worse still, our hearts, against
rocks of adamant. The bull at last made up his mind that he did not
dare to face the hedge; so he gave one final roar, and then turning
himself round, walked placidly back amidst the herd.

Johnny made his way on to the road by a stile that led out of the
copse, and was soon standing over the earl, while the blood ran down
his cheeks from the scratches. One of the legs of his trowsers had
been caught by a stake, and was torn from the hip downward, and his
hat was left in the field, the only trophy for the bull. "I hope
you're not hurt, my lord," he said.

"Oh dear, no; but I'm terribly out of breath. Why, you're bleeding
all over. He didn't get at you, did he?"

"It's only the thorns in the hedge," said Johnny, passing his hand
over his face. "But I've lost my hat."

"There are plenty more hats," said the earl.

"I think I'll have a try for it," said Johnny, with whom the means of
getting hats had not been so plentiful as with the earl. "He looks
quiet now." And he moved towards the gate.

But Lord De Guest jumped upon his feet, and seized the young man by
the collar of his coat. "Go after your hat!" said he. "You must be
a fool to think of it. If you're afraid of catching cold, you shall
have mine."

"I'm not the least afraid of catching cold," said Johnny. "Is he
often like that, my lord?" And he made a motion with his head towards
the bull.

"The gentlest creature alive; he's like a lamb generally--just like a
lamb. Perhaps he saw my red pocket-handkerchief." And Lord De Guest
showed his friend that he carried such an article. "But where should
I have been if you hadn't come up?"

"You'd have got to the gate, my lord."

"Yes; with my feet foremost, and four men carrying me. I'm very
thirsty. You don't happen to carry a flask, do you?"

"No, my lord, I don't."

"Then we'll make the best of our way home, and have a glass of wine
there." And on this occasion his lordship intended that his offer
should be accepted.




