
VALENTINE'S DAY IN LONDON.


The fourteenth of February in London was quite as black, and cold,
and as wintersome as it was at Allington, and was, perhaps, somewhat
more melancholy in its coldness. Nevertheless Lady Alexandrina De
Courcy looked as bright as bridal finery could make her, when she
got out of her carriage and walked into St. James's church at eleven
o'clock on that morning.

It had been finally arranged that the marriage should take place in
London. There were certainly many reasons which would have made a
marriage from Courcy Castle more convenient. The De Courcy family
were all assembled at their country family residence, and could
therefore have been present at the ceremony without cost or trouble.
The castle too was warm with the warmth of life, and the pleasantness
of home would have lent a grace to the departure of one of the
daughters of the house. The retainers and servants were there, and
something of the rich mellowness of a noble alliance might have been
felt, at any rate by Crosbie, at a marriage so celebrated. And it
must have been acknowledged, even by Lady De Courcy, that the house
in Portman Square was very cold--that a marriage from thence would
be cold,--that there could be no hope of attaching to it any honour
and glory, or of making it resound with fashionable éclat in the
columns of the _Morning Post_. But then, had they been married in
the country, the earl would have been there; whereas there was no
probability of his travelling up to London for the purpose of being
present on such an occasion.

The earl was very terrible in these days, and Alexandrina, as she
became confidential in her communications with her future husband,
spoke of him as of an ogre, who could not by any means be avoided
in all the concerns of life, but whom one might shun now and
again by some subtle device and careful arrangement of favourable
circumstances. Crosbie had more than once taken upon himself to hint
that he did not specially regard the ogre, seeing that for the future
he could keep himself altogether apart from the malicious monster's
dominions.

"He will not come to me in our new home," he had said to his love,
with some little touch of affection. But to this view of the case
Lady Alexandrina had demurred. The ogre in question was not only her
parent, but was also a noble peer, and she could not agree to any
arrangement by which their future connection with the earl, and with
nobility in general, might be endangered. Her parent, doubtless, was
an ogre, and in his ogreship could make himself very terrible to
those near him; but then might it not be better for them to be near
to an earl who was an ogre, than not to be near to any earl at all?
She had therefore signified to Crosbie that the ogre must be endured.

But, nevertheless, it was a great thing to be rid of him on that
happy occasion. He would have said very dreadful things,--things so
dreadful that there might have been a question whether the bridegroom
could have borne them. Since he had heard of Crosbie's accident at
the railway station, he had constantly talked with fiendish glee of
the beating which had been administered to his son-in-law. Lady De
Courcy in taking Crosbie's part, and maintaining that the match was
fitting for her daughter, had ventured to declare before her husband
that Crosbie was a man of fashion, and the earl would now ask, with
a loathsome grin, whether the bridegroom's fashion had been improved
by his little adventure at Paddington. Crosbie, to whom all this was
not repeated, would have preferred a wedding in the country. But the
countess and Lady Alexandrina knew better.

The earl had strictly interdicted any expenditure, and the countess
had of necessity construed this as forbidding any unnecessary
expense. "To marry a girl without any immediate cost was a thing
which nobody could understand," as the countess remarked to her
eldest daughter.

"I would really spend as little as possible," Lady Amelia had
answered. "You see, mamma, there are circumstances about it which one
doesn't wish to have talked about just at present. There's the story
of that girl,--and then that fracas at the station. I really think
it ought to be as quiet as possible." The good sense of Lady Amelia
was not to be disputed, as her mother acknowledged. But then if
the marriage were managed in any notoriously quiet way, the very
notoriety of that quiet would be as dangerous as an attempt at loud
glory. "But it won't cost as much," said Amelia. And thus it had been
resolved that the wedding should be very quiet.

To this Crosbie had assented very willingly, though he had not
relished the manner in which the countess had explained to him her
views.

"I need not tell you, Adolphus," she had said, "how thoroughly
satisfied I am with this marriage. My dear girl feels that she can be
happy as your wife, and what more can I want? I declared to her and
to Amelia that I was not ambitious, for their sakes, and have allowed
them both to please themselves."

"I hope they have pleased themselves," said Crosbie.

"I trust so; but nevertheless,--I don't know whether I make myself
understood?"

"Quite so, Lady De Courcy. If Alexandrina were going to marry the
eldest son of a marquis, you would have a longer procession to church
than will be necessary when she marries me."

"You put it in such an odd way, Adolphus."

"It's all right so long as we understand each other. I can assure you
I don't want any procession at all. I should be quite contented to go
down with Alexandrina, arm in arm, like Darby and Joan, and let the
clerk give her away."

We may say that he would have been much better contented could he
have been allowed to go down the street without any encumbrance on
his arm. But there was no possibility now for such deliverance as
that.

Both Lady Amelia and Mr. Gazebee had long since discovered the
bitterness of his heart and the fact of his repentance, and Gazebee
had ventured to suggest to his wife that his noble sister-in-law was
preparing for herself a life of misery.

"He'll become quiet and happy when he's used to it," Lady Amelia had
replied, thinking, perhaps, of her own experiences.

"I don't know, my dear; he's not a quiet man. There's something in
his eye which tells me that he could be very hard to a woman."

"It has gone too far now for any change," Lady Amelia had answered.

"Well; perhaps it has."

"And I know my sister so well; she would not hear of it. I really
think they will do very well when they become used to each other."

Mr. Gazebee, who also had had his own experiences, hardly dared to
hope so much. His home had been satisfactory to him, because he had
been a calculating man, and having made his calculation correctly
was willing to take the net result. He had done so all his life with
success. In his house his wife was paramount,--as he very well knew.
But no effort on his wife's part, had she wished to make such effort,
could have forced him to spend more than two-thirds of his income.
Of this she also was aware, and had trimmed her sails accordingly,
likening herself to him in this respect. But of such wisdom, and such
trimmings, and such adaptability, what likelihood was there with Mr.
Crosbie and Lady Alexandrina?

"At any rate, it is too late now," said Lady Amelia, thus concluding
the conversation.

But nevertheless, when the last moment came, there was some little
attempt at glory. Who does not know the way in which a lately
married couple's little dinner-party stretches itself out from the
pure simplicity of a fried sole and a leg of mutton to the attempt
at clear soup, the unfortunately cold dish of round balls which
is handed about after the sole, and the brightly red jelly, and
beautifully pink cream, which are ordered, in the last agony of
ambition, from the next pastrycook's shop?

"We cannot give a dinner, my dear, with only cook and Sarah."

It has thus begun, and the husband has declared that he has no such
idea. "If Phipps and Dowdney can come here and eat a bit of mutton,
they are very welcome; if not, let them stay away. And you might as
well ask Phipps's sister; just to have some one to go with you into
the drawing-room."

"I'd much rather go alone, because then I can read,"--or sleep, we
may say.

But her husband has explained that she would look friendless in this
solitary state, and therefore Phipps's sister has been asked. Then
the dinner has progressed down to those costly jellies which have
been ordered in a last agony. There has been a conviction on the
minds of both of them that the simple leg of mutton would have been
more jolly for them all. Had those round balls not been carried about
by a hired man; had simple mutton with hot potatoes been handed to
Miss Phipps by Sarah, Miss Phipps would not have simpered with such
unmeaning stiffness when young Dowdney spoke to her. They would have
been much more jolly. "Have a bit more mutton, Phipps; and where
do you like it?" How pleasant it sounds! But we all know that it
is impossible. My young friend had intended this, but his dinner
had run itself away to cold round balls and coloured forms from the
pastrycook. And so it was with the Crosbie marriage.

The bride must leave the church in a properly appointed carriage, and
the postboys must have wedding favours. So the thing grew; not into
noble proportions, not into proportions of true glory, justifying
the attempt and making good the gala. A well-cooked rissole, brought
pleasantly to you, is good eating. A gala marriage, when everything
is in keeping, is excellent sport. Heaven forbid that we should
have no gala marriages. But the small spasmodic attempt, made in
opposition to manifest propriety, made with an inner conviction of
failure,--that surely should be avoided in marriages, in dinners, and
in all affairs of life.

There were bridesmaids and there was a breakfast. Both Margaretta and
Rosina came up to London for the occasion, as did also a first cousin
of theirs, one Miss Gresham, a lady whose father lived in the same
county. Mr. Gresham had married a sister of Lord De Courcy's, and his
services were also called into requisition. He was brought up to give
away the bride, because the earl,--as the paragraph in the newspaper
declared,--was confined at Courcy Castle by his old hereditary enemy,
the gout. A fourth bridesmaid also was procured, and thus there was
a bevy, though not so large a bevy as is now generally thought to be
desirable. There were only three or four carriages at the church, but
even three or four were something. The weather was so frightfully
cold that the light-coloured silks of the ladies carried with them
a show of discomfort. Girls should be very young to look nice in
light dresses on a frosty morning, and the bridesmaids at Lady
Alexandrina's wedding were not very young. Lady Rosina's nose was
decidedly red. Lady Margaretta was very wintry, and apparently very
cross. Miss Gresham was dull, tame, and insipid; and the Honourable
Miss O'Flaherty, who filled the fourth place, was sulky at finding
that she had been invited to take a share in so very lame a
performance.

But the marriage was made good, and Crosbie bore up against his
misfortunes like a man. Montgomerie Dobbs and Fowler Pratt both stood
by him, giving him, let us hope, some assurance that he was not
absolutely deserted by all the world,--that he had not given himself
up, bound hand and foot, to the De Courcys, to be dealt with in all
matters as they might please. It was that feeling which had been so
grievous to him,--and that other feeling, cognate to it, that if he
should ultimately succeed in rebelling against the De Courcys, he
would find himself a solitary man.

"Yes; I shall go," Fowler Pratt had said to Montgomerie Dobbs.
"I always stick to a fellow if I can. Crosbie has behaved like a
blackguard, and like a fool also; and he knows that I think so. But I
don't see why I should drop him on that account. I shall go as he has
asked me."

"So shall I," said Montgomerie Dobbs, who considered that he would be
safe in doing whatever Fowler Pratt did, and who remarked to himself
that after all Crosbie was marrying the daughter of an earl.

Then, after the marriage, came the breakfast, at which the countess
presided with much noble magnificence. She had not gone to church,
thinking, no doubt, that she would be better able to maintain her
good humour at the feast, if she did not subject herself to the
chance of lumbago in the church. At the foot of the table sat Mr.
Gresham, her brother-in-law, who had undertaken to give the necessary
toast and make the necessary speech. The Honourable John was there,
saying all manner of ill-natured things about his sister and new
brother-in-law, because he had been excluded from his proper position
at the foot of the table. But Alexandrina had declared that she would
not have the matter entrusted to her brother. The Honourable George
would not come, because the countess had not asked his wife.

"Maria may be slow, and all that sort of thing," George had said;
"but she is my wife. And she had got what they haven't. Love me, love
my dog, you know." So he had stayed down at Courcy,--very properly as
I think.

Alexandrina had wished to go away before breakfast, and Crosbie would
not have cared how early an escape had been provided for him; but
the countess had told her daughter that if she would not wait for
the breakfast, there should be no breakfast at all, and in fact no
wedding; nothing but a simple marriage. Had there been a grand party,
that going away of the bride and bridegroom might be very well; but
the countess felt that on such an occasion as this nothing but the
presence of the body of the sacrifice could give any reality to
the festivity. So Crosbie and Lady Alexandrina Crosbie heard Mr.
Gresham's speech, in which he prophesied for the young couple an
amount of happiness and prosperity almost greater than is compatible
with the circumstances of humanity. His young friend Crosbie, whose
acquaintance he had been delighted to make, was well known as one
of the rising pillars of the State. Whether his future career might
be parliamentary, or devoted to the permanent Civil Service of the
country, it would be alike great, noble, and prosperous. As to his
dear niece, who was now filling that position in life which was
most beautiful and glorious for a young woman,--she could not
have done better. She had preferred genius to wealth,--so said Mr.
Gresham,--and she would find her fitting reward. As to her finding
her fitting reward, whatever her preferences may have been, there Mr.
Gresham was no doubt quite right. On that head I myself have no doubt
whatever. After that Crosbie returned thanks, making a much better
speech than nine men do out of ten on such occasions, and then the
thing was over. No other speaking was allowed, and within half an
hour from that time, he and his bride were in the post-chaise, being
carried away to the Folkestone railway station; for that place had
been chosen as the scene of their honeymoon. It had been at one time
intended that the journey to Folkestone should be made simply as the
first stage to Paris, but Paris and all foreign travelling had been
given up by degrees.

"I don't care a bit about France,--we have been there so often,"
Alexandrina said.

She had wished to be taken to Naples, but Crosbie had made her
understand at the first whispering of the word, that Naples was quite
out of the question. He must look now in all things to money. From
the very first outset of his career he must save a shilling wherever
a shilling could be saved. To this view of life no opposition was
made by the De Courcy interest. Lady Amelia had explained to her
sister that they ought so to do their honeymooning that it should not
cost more than if they began keeping house at once. Certain things
must be done which, no doubt, were costly in their nature. The bride
must take with her a well-dressed lady's-maid. The rooms at the
Folkestone hotel must be large, and on the first floor. A carriage
must be hired for her use while she remained; but every shilling must
be saved the spending of which would not make itself apparent to the
outer world. Oh, deliver us from the poverty of those who, with small
means, affect a show of wealth! There is no whitening equal to that
of sepulchres whited as they are whited!

By the proper administration of a slight bribe Crosbie secured
for himself and his wife a compartment in the railway carriage to
themselves. And as he seated himself opposite to Alexandrina, having
properly tucked her up with all her bright-coloured trappings, he
remembered that he had never in truth been alone with her before.
He had danced with her frequently, and been left with her for a few
minutes between the figures. He had flirted with her in crowded
drawing-rooms, and had once found a moment at Courcy Castle to tell
her that he was willing to marry her in spite of his engagement with
Lilian Dale. But he had never walked with her for hours together as
he had walked with Lily. He had never talked to her about government,
and politics, and books, nor had she talked to him of poetry, of
religion, and of the little duties and comforts of life. He had known
the Lady Alexandrina for the last six or seven years; but he had
never known her,--perhaps never would know her,--as he had learned to
know Lily Dale within the space of two months.

And now that she was his wife, what was he to say to her? They
two had commenced a partnership which was to make of them for the
remaining term of their lives one body and one flesh. They were to
be all-in-all to each other. But how was he to begin this all-in-all
partnership? Had the priest, with his blessing, done it so
sufficiently that no other doing on Crosbie's own part was necessary?
There she was, opposite to him, his very actual wife,--bone of his
bone; and what was he to say to her? As he settled himself on his
seat, taking over his own knees a part of a fine fur rug trimmed with
scarlet, with which he had covered her other mufflings, he bethought
himself how much easier it would have been to talk to Lily. And Lily
would have been ready with all her ears, and all her mind, and all
her wit, to enter quickly upon whatever thoughts had occurred to him.
In that respect Lily would have been a wife indeed,--a wife that
would have transferred herself with quick mental activity into her
husband's mental sphere. Had he begun about his office Lily would
have been ready for him, but Alexandrina had never yet asked him a
single question about his official life. Had he been prepared with a
plan for to-morrow's happiness Lily would have taken it up eagerly,
but Alexandrina never cared for such trifles.

"Are you quite comfortable?" he said, at last.

"Oh, yes, quite, thank you. By-the-by, what did you do with my
dressing-case?"

And that question she did ask with some energy.

"It is under you. You can have it as foot-stool if you like it."

"Oh, no; I should scratch it. I was afraid that if Hannah had it,
it might be lost." Then again there was silence, and Crosbie again
considered as to what he would next say to his wife.

We all know the advice given us of old as to what we should do
under such circumstances; and who can be so thoroughly justified in
following that advice as a newly-married husband? So he put out his
hand for hers and drew her closer to him.

"Take care of my bonnet," she said, as she felt the motion of the
railway carriage when he kissed her. I don't think he kissed her
again till he had landed her and her bonnet safely at Folkestone. How
often would he have kissed Lily, and how pretty would her bonnet have
been when she reached the end of her journey, and how delightfully
happy would she have looked when she scolded him for bending it! But
Alexandrina was quite in earnest about her bonnet; by far too much in
earnest for any appearance of happiness.

So he sat without speaking, till the train came to the tunnel.

"I do so hate tunnels," said Alexandrina.

He had half intended to put out his hand again, under some mistaken
idea that the tunnel afforded him an opportunity. The whole journey
was one long opportunity, had he desired it; but his wife hated
tunnels, and so he drew his hand back again. Lily's little fingers
would have been ready for his touch. He thought of this, and could
not help thinking of it.

He had _The Times_ newspaper in his dressing-bag. She also had a
novel with her. Would she be offended if he took out the paper and
read it? The miles seemed to pass by very slowly, and there was still
another hour down to Folkestone. He longed for his _Times_, but
resolved at last that he would not read unless she read first. She
also had remembered her novel; but by nature she was more patient
than he, and she thought that on such a journey any reading might
perhaps be almost improper. So she sat tranquilly, with her eyes
fixed on the netting over her husband's head.

At last he could stand it no longer, and he dashed off into a
conversation, intended to be most affectionate and serious.

"Alexandrina," he said, and his voice was well-tuned for the tender
serious manner, had her ears been alive to such tuning. "Alexandrina,
this is a very important step that you and I have taken to-day."

"Yes; it is, indeed," said she.

"I trust we shall succeed in making each other happy."

"Yes; I hope we shall."

"If we both think seriously of it, and remember that that is our
chief duty, we shall do so."

"Yes, I suppose we shall. I only hope we shan't find the house very
cold. It is so new, and I am so subject to colds in my head. Amelia
says we shall find it very cold; but then she was always against our
going there."

"The house will do very well," said Crosbie. And Alexandrina could
perceive that there was something of the master in his tone as he
spoke.

"I am only telling you what Amelia said," she replied.

Had Lily been his bride, and had he spoken to her of their future
life and mutual duties, how she would have kindled to the theme!
She would have knelt at his feet on the floor of the carriage,
and, looking up into his face, would have promised him to do her
best,--her best,--her very best. And with what an eagerness of inward
resolution would she have determined to keep her promise. He thought
of all this now, but he knew that he ought not to think of it. Then,
for some quarter of an hour, he did take out his newspaper, and she,
when she saw him do so, did take out her novel.

He took out his newspaper, but he could not fix his mind upon the
politics of the day. Had he not made a terrible mistake? Of what
use to him in life would be that thing of a woman that sat opposite
to him? Had not a great punishment come upon him, and had he not
deserved the punishment? In truth, a great punishment had come
upon him. It was not only that he had married a woman incapable of
understanding the higher duties of married life, but that he himself
would have been capable of appreciating the value of a woman who
did understand them. He would have been happy with Lily Dale; and
therefore we may surmise that his unhappiness with Lady Alexandrina
would be the greater. There are men who, in marrying such as Lady
Alexandrina De Courcy, would get the article best suited to them,
as Mortimer Gazebee had done in marrying her sister. Miss Griselda
Grantly, who had become Lady Dumbello, though somewhat colder and
somewhat cleverer than Lady Alexandrina, had been of the same sort.
But in marrying her, Lord Dumbello had got the article best suited
to him;--if only the ill-natured world would allow him to keep
the article. It was in this that Crosbie's failure had been so
grievous,--that he had seen and approved the better course, but had
chosen for himself to walk in that which was worse. During that week
at Courcy Castle,--the week which he passed there immediately after
his second visit to Allington,--he had deliberately made up his mind
that he was more fit for the bad course than for the good one. The
course was now before him, and he had no choice but to walk in it.

It was very cold when they got to Folkestone, and Lady Alexandrina
shivered as she stepped into the private-looking carriage which had
been sent to the station for her use.

"We shall find a good fire in the parlour at the hotel," said
Crosbie.

"Oh, I hope so," said Alexandrina, "and in the bedroom too."

The young husband felt himself to be offended, but he hardly knew
why. He felt himself to be offended, and with difficulty induced
himself to go through all those little ceremonies the absence
of which would have been remarked by everybody. He did his work,
however, seeing to all her shawls and wrappings, speaking with
good-nature to Hannah, and paying special attention to the
dressing-case.

"What time would you like to dine?" he asked, as he prepared to leave
her alone with Hannah in the bedroom.

"Whenever you please; only I should like some tea and
bread-and-butter presently."

Crosbie went into the sitting-room, ordered the tea and
bread-and-butter, ordered also the dinner, and then stood himself up
with his back to the fire, in order that he might think a little of
his future career.

He was a man who had long since resolved that his life should be a
success. It would seem that all men would so resolve, if the matter
were simply one of resolution. But the majority of men, as I take it,
make no such resolution, and very many men resolve that they will
be unsuccessful. Crosbie, however, had resolved on success, and had
done much towards carrying out his purpose. He had made a name for
himself, and had acquired a certain fame. That, however, was, as he
acknowledged to himself, departing from him. He looked the matter
straight in the face, and told himself that his fashion must be
abandoned; but the office remained to him. He might still rule over
Mr. Optimist, and make a subservient slave of Butterwell. That must
be his line in life now, and to that line he would endeavour to
be true. As to his wife and his home,--he would look to them for
his breakfast, and perhaps his dinner. He would have a comfortable
arm-chair, and if Alexandrina should become a mother, he would
endeavour to love his children; but above all things he would never
think of Lily. After that he stood and thought of her for half an
hour.

"If you please, sir, my lady wants to know at what time you have
ordered dinner."

"At seven, Hannah."

"My lady says she is very tired, and will lie down till dinner-time."

"Very well, Hannah. I will go into her room when it is time to dress.
I hope they are making you comfortable downstairs?"

Then Crosbie strolled out on the pier in the dusk of the cold winter
evening.




